[Amit Varma]: If you're an Indian of a certain age, you might have heard the question, where were
[Amit Varma]: you when India won the 1983 World Cup?
[Amit Varma]: If you're somewhat younger, the question could be, where were you when Dravid and Lakshman
[Amit Varma]: had that partnership?
[Amit Varma]: Or when Abhinav Bindra won gold at the Olympics?
[Amit Varma]: Or Vishy Anand became world champion or Dhoni hit that six?
[Amit Varma]: Someday they will surely ask, where were you when Neeraj Chopra threw that javelin?
[Amit Varma]: Why is sport such a big deal for so many of us?
[Amit Varma]: But moments that don't even feature us, that we had nothing to do with personally, become
[Amit Varma]: such a big part of our lives.
[Amit Varma]: Part of the answer isn't pleasant.
[Amit Varma]: Sport can be used to whip up ugly nationalistic sentiment, akin to war minus a shooting, in
[Amit Varma]: George Orwell's famous words.
[Amit Varma]: It's a zero-sum game.
[Amit Varma]: Someone has to lose for someone else to win.
[Amit Varma]: And indeed, some sports like boxing are like ugly artifacts from a more brutal age.
[Amit Varma]: But having said this, sport can also elevate us.
[Amit Varma]: It can reveal the best of human character.
[Amit Varma]: And watching another human being transcend their limitations can inspire us to dream.
[Amit Varma]: Indeed, one thing I love about the Olympics is the range of human stories that we are
[Amit Varma]: exposed to.
[Amit Varma]: So many different people beating the odds and rising above their circumstances.
[Amit Varma]: And sometimes those circumstances can be so harsh that just being there is a crazy achievement.
[Amit Varma]: Even though I'm middle-aged now and should be jaded and cynical, I can't fail to be both
[Amit Varma]: inspired and humbled by what these sports people achieve.
[Amit Varma]: And that's especially so if they're from India.
[Amit Varma]: The obstacles for a sportsperson here are insane, almost insurmountable.
[Amit Varma]: Over the decades, Indian sport outside of cricket has been held back by poverty, bad
[Amit Varma]: governance, poor infrastructure, and an inferiority complex.
[Amit Varma]: Time and again, we have told ourselves, this is beyond us.
[Amit Varma]: We are not a sporting nation.
[Amit Varma]: We can't dream these dreams.
[Amit Varma]: We can't do this.
[Amit Varma]: Well, the times have changed.
[Amit Varma]: We can do this.
[Amit Varma]: We are doing this.
[Amit Varma]: Indian sport has turned a corner.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badman.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My last episode was about the 1991 reforms and how they changed the way we look at ourselves.
[Amit Varma]: In the decades since, India opened itself up to the world and gained a new self-confidence.
[Amit Varma]: More and more people became participants in our progress.
[Amit Varma]: And what happened to Indian society and India's economy was mirrored in sport.
[Amit Varma]: Now, sadly, in both social and economic terms, we seem to have slipped backwards.
[Amit Varma]: Things don't look good.
[Amit Varma]: But as far as sport is concerned, we are marching on.
[Amit Varma]: As the euphoria of the Tokyo Olympics settles down, why don't we take stock of Indian sport?
[Amit Varma]: My guests today are Joy Bhattacharya and Nandan Kamath.
[Amit Varma]: Joy has been on the show before.
[Amit Varma]: In a fabulous episode, I'll link from the show notes called Building Sports Ecosystems.
[Amit Varma]: He spent the first hour of that episode talking about his experience of building the Kolkata
[Amit Varma]: Knight Riders.
[Amit Varma]: But it was the second hour that I found both moving and inspiring.
[Amit Varma]: In that, he gave us a close-up look of his journey bringing the Under-17 Football World
[Amit Varma]: Cup to India and trying to build a football ecosystem across the country.
[Amit Varma]: He then moved on to volleyball and formed a volleyball league that faced many obstacles
[Amit Varma]: but is due to return soon.
[Amit Varma]: And as you will learn from this episode, he also taught the Indian contingent at Tokyo
[Amit Varma]: to do the Namaste.
[Amit Varma]: My second guest today is also a remarkable figure.
[Amit Varma]: Nandan Kamath loved sports so much as a kid that he would go to bed with a cricket bat
[Amit Varma]: cradled in his arms.
[Amit Varma]: He played cricket for India at the Under-16 level and captained the Karnataka team.
[Amit Varma]: He then chose law as a profession, became a lawyer, went to Oxford as a Rhodes Scholar,
[Amit Varma]: went to Harvard Law School, worked in a top law firm there for three years, and then gave
[Amit Varma]: it up and came back to India because in his heart, he was still that little boy sleeping
[Amit Varma]: with a cricket bat.
[Amit Varma]: In 2008, he started the GoSports Foundation, whose aim was to help Indian sportspeople
[Amit Varma]: who would otherwise fall through the cracks.
[Amit Varma]: Over the years, Nandan and his team have helped countless Indian sportspeople in so many unseen
[Amit Varma]: ways.
[Amit Varma]: His insights on Indian sport are second to none.
[Amit Varma]: The show notes to this episode contain links to articles by him as well as to a fantastic
[Amit Varma]: book on Indian sport, co-edited by him.
[Amit Varma]: Do check those out.
[Amit Varma]: And now, before we get to the conversation with Nandan and Joy, let's take a quick commercial
[Amit Varma]: break.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, chances are that many of you first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut,
[Amit Varma]: which was active between 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time.
[Amit Varma]: I love the freedom the form gave me, and I feel I was shaped by it in many ways.
[Amit Varma]: I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced to think about many different things
[Amit Varma]: because I wrote about many different things.
[Amit Varma]: Well, that phase in my life ended for various reasons, and now it is time to revive it.
[Amit Varma]: Only now, I'm doing it through a newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com, where I will write
[Amit Varma]: regularly about whatever catches my fancy.
[Amit Varma]: I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else.
[Amit Varma]: So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe.
[Amit Varma]: It is free.
[Amit Varma]: Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to go anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So subscribe now for free.
[Amit Varma]: The India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Joy and Nandan, welcome to The Scene and The Unseen.
[Guest 2]: Hi, terrific to be here, absolutely terrific to be back and to be one of the people who's
[Guest 2]: been called back is a signal honor for me.
[Guest 1]: Thank you so much, Amit.
[Guest 1]: I'm a debutant here.
[Guest 1]: And it's a little bit weird, because I've heard you for maybe two or 300 hours.
[Guest 1]: And now I have a chance to speak.
[Guest 1]: I think I'm, it's the heard and the unheard.
[Guest 1]: So I'm the unheard of the show.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, I mean, it's entirely my honor.
[Amit Varma]: And I since you've heard so much of the show, I should apologize to you for speaking at
[Amit Varma]: normal speed, because I think most people who listen, listen at higher speeds, and they
[Amit Varma]: find it really weird when they're, you know, they meet me in person, like why are you talking
[Amit Varma]: so slowly?
[Amit Varma]: The reason I say it's an honor for me is because, you know, people like me, we sit around pontificating
[Amit Varma]: about things, having conversations, having discussions.
[Amit Varma]: And one reason I admire Joy, and one reason I was keen to have you on the show, as soon
[Amit Varma]: as I read up on all the things that you've done, is that you guys are actually out there
[Amit Varma]: making a difference in the real world, not just sitting back and complaining, kya sport
[Amit Varma]: mein yeh haal hai, and look at that federation and this and that, but you're actually out
[Amit Varma]: there kind of making a difference, which is why Joy, before you joined the call, I congratulated
[Amit Varma]: Nandan on the Tokyo result.
[Amit Varma]: And he would, of course, very modestly say that maine kuch nahi kiya, yeh sab athletes
[Amit Varma]: hai.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, you guys are also heroes of people who love Indian sport in a way, but
[Amit Varma]: I won't embarrass you further.
[Amit Varma]: You know, before we get down to talking about the state of Indian sport, and so on, I'd
[Amit Varma]: love to know a little bit about your personal journeys.
[Amit Varma]: Joy, of course, in the fantastic episode we did earlier, which I linked from the show
[Amit Varma]: notes to the listeners, you already took us through a bit of it, but I'll ask you more.
[Amit Varma]: So let's start with you, Nandan.
[Amit Varma]: It's not that you are a lawyer who's gotten into supporting sports and all of that right
[Amit Varma]: now.
[Amit Varma]: You've been a sports person yourself.
[Amit Varma]: You've represented India, I believe, right?
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about your sporting journey and where it begins.
[Amit Varma]: And I read somewhere that you speaking very sort of passionately about how you love sport
[Amit Varma]: so much, that when you were a kid at night, you would sleep with a cricket bat in your
[Amit Varma]: bed, which is, tell me a bit about those years.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, so like you put it, Amit, I wasn't a lawyer who went to sport, but a sports person
[Guest 1]: who ended up in the law.
[Guest 1]: And that is the story really sleeping with a cricket bat, right?
[Guest 1]: I think that says it all.
[Guest 1]: In my bedroom, I had this huge poster of Kapil Dev.
[Guest 1]: My sister had a huge poster of Madonna.
[Guest 1]: And that perhaps speaks enough of the both of us.
[Guest 1]: But really, as a kid, just absolutely in love with sport.
[Guest 1]: I had whole World Cups played by myself against the wall, old Wimbledon's, just so obsessed
[Guest 1]: with the sporting journey and the sporting quest, had lots of heroes, early memories
[Guest 1]: are watching the Olympics, Greg Louganis, Bo Villander, Ben Johnson may not be the greatest
[Guest 1]: ambassador, but all of those are just so imprinted in my mind, but also people like Stefan Edberg.
[Guest 1]: It was really sport was this window out into the world for me, new accents, understanding
[Guest 1]: people seeing, I mean, hearing Australian commentators on the cricket.
[Guest 1]: And the earliest memory of all I do have is the 1983 World Cup.
[Guest 1]: And it's a little bit sort of overdone.
[Guest 1]: But I just remember obsessively going through, they had this official guide to the Prudential
[Guest 1]: World Cup 1983.
[Guest 1]: I must have read that book, like literally 200 times or 300 times, I knew every scorecard.
[Guest 1]: And you Dave Houghton and Tricos, and I mean, literally every player that played for every
[Guest 1]: one of those teams.
[Guest 1]: And it was that obsession, which really never left, in some sense, it translated into playing
[Guest 1]: sport at the school level.
[Guest 1]: So I do share something with Abhinav Bindra and Neeraj Chopra.
[Guest 1]: My mom put me into sport because I was a little bit unfit, a little bit pudgy, and wanted
[Guest 1]: me to stay out of trouble.
[Guest 1]: But that's where the comparison ends.
[Guest 1]: So she put me into school, took me to the PT instructor and said, let him play hockey.
[Guest 1]: So hockey was my first sport, loved it, fantastic team sport.
[Guest 1]: But as I went along, cricket became the one that I was a little bit better at.
[Guest 1]: I had good hand-eye coordination, something I played in the streets, but was able to translate
[Guest 1]: into competitive cricket.
[Guest 1]: I took that pursuit quite seriously, ended up captaining the Karnataka State cricket
[Guest 1]: team at the under-16 level.
[Guest 1]: When I was 15, I got into the under-21 team.
[Guest 1]: So I mean, there was that potential, but that potential ended pretty abruptly when I went
[Guest 1]: to the National Law School entrance exam and I got in.
[Guest 1]: And it became that point of making a decision, are you going to try and pursue this cricket?
[Guest 1]: Or are you going to become a lawyer?
[Guest 1]: And that was something very directly confronted with at my National Law School interview,
[Guest 1]: where Dr. Madhav Menon, the founder of the law school, sits you down for an interview.
[Guest 1]: And he just said, young man, are you going to be a cricketer?
[Guest 1]: Are you going to be a lawyer?
[Guest 1]: And I hadn't really thought of it in that sense.
[Guest 1]: Is it this such a significant binary choice that a 17-year-old person needs to make?
[Guest 1]: I mean, that's a life choice.
[Guest 1]: And I was very fortunate.
[Guest 1]: I had very, very open-minded parents, my father was a chartered accountant.
[Guest 1]: My mother was a political cartoonist.
[Guest 1]: Still, I think India's only political cartoonist, passed away about 20 years ago.
[Guest 1]: But so I had a very open household.
[Guest 1]: We had lots of cousins and uncles in the IITs and very academic.
[Guest 1]: But they said, you make the choice.
[Guest 1]: You want to continue playing cricket?
[Guest 1]: Go for it.
[Guest 1]: You want to be a lawyer?
[Guest 1]: And I chose that latter choice.
[Guest 1]: And at that point, it didn't seem like a very difficult choice to make.
[Guest 1]: There were maybe six, seven people making good careers out of cricket.
[Guest 1]: There were probably thousands of lawyers making reasonable careers.
[Guest 1]: So I chose what you would call the conservative choice.
[Guest 1]: And looking back, I feel like that defined me, defined not just the pursuit of doing
[Guest 1]: well at the law, I'd given up something I really cared about, and I was possibly good
[Guest 1]: at.
[Guest 1]: And that drove me really hard to do well at my academics.
[Guest 1]: You know, you give up something you loved.
[Guest 1]: Make the other thing count now.
[Guest 1]: But also when I look back on that moment, you know, it may be romanticizing the moment,
[Guest 1]: but it also might be looking back and finding explanations.
[Guest 1]: But that choice for a young person to make, it really stuck with me and still does.
[Guest 1]: That someone needs to make that choice between pursuing an education and pursuing sport.
[Guest 1]: And in many ways, that has defined my journey and the things I've chosen to do, the things
[Guest 1]: I care about.
[Guest 1]: Just really snapshot early years, you I mean, people talk about non vegetarians, I'm willing
[Guest 1]: to to eat anything that moves for me, anything that was sport, I loved and I was willing
[Guest 1]: to sort of jump in, get involved, participate.
[Guest 1]: It was just just a love affair with sport.
[Guest 1]: I can't explain it.
[Guest 1]: It was me.
[Guest 1]: And it still is in some sense.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's very resonant.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, it sort of dates you in a certain generation of people 1983 World Cup, the potential
[Amit Varma]: handbook.
[Amit Varma]: I remember, you know, when I was growing up, I had this thick wisdom book of scorecards,
[Amit Varma]: which was published in 1979, and basically had the scorecard of every test match played
[Amit Varma]: until then.
[Amit Varma]: And I knew all of them by heart pretty much and that there weren't that many test matches
[Amit Varma]: played until then, of course, at that point.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, one would go through all those scorecards and make up narratives in your
[Amit Varma]: head about what happened along with all the other supplementary reading you're doing.
[Amit Varma]: And there was such a paucity of that information.
[Amit Varma]: And so on as well, you know, you had one channel, Doordarshan, you didn't really get to see
[Amit Varma]: much sports in it.
[Amit Varma]: You didn't get too much exposure in that sense.
[Amit Varma]: And your choice is particularly heartbreaking.
[Amit Varma]: Because at one level, these are choices that everybody makes that at some point you, you
[Amit Varma]: know, there is the road taken, and there is a road not taken.
[Amit Varma]: And at that point in time, we might think it's a trivial choice.
[Amit Varma]: It's not such a big deal.
[Amit Varma]: But essentially, you know, one life you could have lived, it's just over at that point,
[Amit Varma]: and another one begins.
[Amit Varma]: But it's especially heartbreaking in the sporting context, because the fact that even if you're
[Amit Varma]: an incredibly talented cricketer, the rational choice would still have been go for law because
[Amit Varma]: like you said, survivor bias, just a handful of people at the top make money, the rest
[Amit Varma]: of the people don't really make anything.
[Amit Varma]: Joy, tell me a little bit about your journey, because to the best of my knowledge, you haven't
[Amit Varma]: really played for India or captain the state team so far.
[Amit Varma]: But you've been deeply involved with sports, you know, right from 96, if I remember correctly,
[Amit Varma]: from our last conversation.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, you were a lover of sport before that as well.
[Amit Varma]: So sort of take me through that.
[Amit Varma]: And also, I wonder if you have any insights, like I've been sort of thinking and memory
[Amit Varma]: is a really strange thing, because you don't always remember what happened, you remember
[Amit Varma]: what you remember, and it changes over time, right?
[Amit Varma]: And sometimes I try and sit back and think about what it was to be an Indian sporting
[Amit Varma]: fan at the time, that is there a sense of inferiority complex, for example, is there
[Amit Varma]: an assumption that we can never be world class, except perhaps in cricket, which like four
[Amit Varma]: and a half countries play seriously or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: So what are those sort of stages like?
[Amit Varma]: And what is that point?
[Amit Varma]: Like, in a sense, you got into you perhaps love sport all your life, but you get into
[Amit Varma]: active involvement with sport at a time when satellite television comes, India opens up,
[Amit Varma]: you can watch sports channels, you can watch every sport across the world.
[Amit Varma]: How does that mindset begin to change over a period of time?
[Guest 2]: Well, lots of us, look, to start off, I played sport in college, I played basketball, seriously
[Guest 2]: played for the university, my university was fairly, no, no, it's okay, I was fairly decent
[Guest 2]: at it.
[Guest 2]: But I mean, fairly decent at a university in Bengal, which is not exactly the hotbed
[Guest 2]: of basketball is, is absolutely fine.
[Guest 2]: But what I did get a great sense of is because I've done inter-university tournaments, what
[Guest 2]: I did have a great sense of was, especially for sport, which is not cricket.
[Guest 2]: And of course, in those days, at the college level, I don't think it makes that much of
[Guest 2]: a difference.
[Guest 2]: The way sportsmen are treated, I mean, you go for a tournament, you literally sleep on
[Guest 2]: floors, you have, you go to the fields to bathroom, because the bathrooms are so dirty,
[Guest 2]: you can't go anywhere there.
[Guest 2]: So I've seen all of that, you know, and the two other things that I have seen, perhaps
[Guest 2]: being a bit older than you blokes is, you know, when Sunil Gavaskar was batting and
[Guest 2]: you're listening to commentary, you know, whether it's 76 or 79.
[Guest 2]: So all Indian fans are, you know, today, they listen for wins.
[Guest 2]: They listen that, okay, you know, we're going to win this match, we're going to do this.
[Guest 2]: Gavaskar is not batting for wins.
[Guest 2]: He was batting for our self-respect.
[Guest 2]: You know, there's Gavaskar, there's Vishwanath, and there are a couple of players in between,
[Guest 2]: and there's nothing else.
[Guest 2]: So every time he goes out there and faces these desperately dangerous fast bowlers,
[Guest 2]: whether it's Bob Willis or Dennis Tilly or Jeff Thompson or Michael Holding, he's batting
[Guest 2]: for our self-respect.
[Guest 2]: You can go out and show your face there because, you know, Gavaskar is there.
[Guest 2]: So literally, you get onto the bus to go to, you know, school or wherever, and you're waiting
[Guest 2]: because when you're going to get off and go and ask that, you know, is he still around?
[Guest 2]: Or if you're coming back from school, is Gavaskar still batting?
[Guest 2]: So I was part of that one era where literally a self-respecting draw was so important to
[Guest 2]: us.
[Guest 2]: Victories were very few and far between.
[Guest 2]: You know, everyone talks about 76 board of Spain.
[Guest 2]: But you know, how many times did we do that?
[Guest 2]: Or 81 Melbourne.
[Guest 2]: They are very few and far between.
[Guest 2]: By and large, you're just saying, guys, just allow us to leave this match with our head
[Guest 2]: held high.
[Guest 2]: Or even if it's a defeat, let it not be a crushing defeat.
[Guest 2]: So I've seen a lot of that phase of Indian cricket, which perhaps you guys have seen.
[Guest 2]: Post-83, you've seen far more success.
[Guest 2]: And really, our test sides were also better coupled there, you know, 86-87 England, 91-92,
[Guest 2]: we are actually competing in Australia as well.
[Guest 2]: So those are very different sides from the sides that I saw between the mid-70s and mid-80s.
[Guest 2]: And the other thing that I did see is the actual, you know, one sport rising and the
[Guest 2]: other in decline, which is cricket and hockey.
[Guest 2]: So in every middle-class household in the big 60s, I don't know about the rest, everyone
[Guest 2]: had a hockey stick as well.
[Guest 2]: You would have a hockey stick at home.
[Guest 2]: You'd go down and play hockey.
[Guest 2]: And in fact, most of the balls with which we played cricket most of the time were cocket
[Guest 2]: balls where a lot of hockey was played.
[Guest 2]: If you didn't play serious cricket, if you played at home, you played a lot with the
[Guest 2]: cocket ball.
[Guest 2]: And those are the kind of things that are actually, I remember actually, if you see
[Guest 2]: a Hrishikesh Mukherjee film like Golmal, he's crazy about cricket, he's crazy about hockey.
[Guest 2]: And then this slowly starts diverging at some point in time.
[Guest 2]: And I think that's the two journeys I saw.
[Guest 2]: I've seen Indian cricket's journey to self-respect and winning.
[Guest 2]: And I've seen Indian cricket rise and Indian hockey fall.
[Amit Varma]: You know, like you brought up the interesting point of self-respect, which is, again, resonant,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Gavaskar's playing.
[Amit Varma]: And today we look back and we say that, oh, you know, personal records mattered and Gavaskar
[Amit Varma]: would play for himself and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is, most of the time the team would lose, especially when they went abroad.
[Amit Varma]: So he's just putting up the front that he can.
[Amit Varma]: But my question about self-respect is this.
[Amit Varma]: This ties into a larger question that if we kind of look at how the world has progressed
[Amit Varma]: in the last 20, 30 years, not just India, but the world is that there is a fragmentation
[Amit Varma]: of everything.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you look at the media in the 80s and 90s, you have these trusted mainstream
[Amit Varma]: sources.
[Amit Varma]: There is a consensus on truth and then it gets democratized and everything gets completely
[Amit Varma]: fragmented and it's both good and bad.
[Amit Varma]: It's good because now everyone has a means of production.
[Amit Varma]: And some of the negative knock-on effects are that it becomes a war of narratives.
[Amit Varma]: There's no consensus on truth anymore.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, what I see happening in entertainment and perhaps sport, which I would kind of say
[Amit Varma]: is a twin of entertainment in a certain sense, is that, you know, there are more options.
[Amit Varma]: Like if you were in the 70s, you would be watching hockey and cricket and maybe the
[Amit Varma]: balance shifted at some point, but essentially that was it.
[Amit Varma]: Today, there's a lot else, you know, even something like chess is very popular on YouTube
[Amit Varma]: and there are all these other kinds of sports which people follow, you know, in the last
[Amit Varma]: 20 years, there's been this burgeoning of Indian fans suddenly finding English football
[Amit Varma]: clubs to be loyal to, even though they've never been there.
[Amit Varma]: Is that something that in a sense has changed the stakes?
[Amit Varma]: Is that a reason why a modern Indian sporting fan may not understand, say, the visceral
[Amit Varma]: impact that sport could have had on people like us?
[Amit Varma]: And of course, at this moment, speaking purely from a sort of a fanhood perspective.
[Guest 2]: So look, the two things, one is that one of the things that the international sport did
[Guest 2]: do when it started coming in, especially Star Sports and all these channels coming in, it
[Guest 2]: showed us something that we were not aware of and it was a rude awakening.
[Guest 2]: And I remember specifically in football, the rude awakening, like we've had Premier League
[Guest 2]: football and all going on since 93, 94.
[Guest 2]: But in 1996, ESPN Star Sports, in those days, there was a separate ESPN channel and a separate
[Guest 2]: Star Sports channel.
[Guest 2]: They got together around 97.
[Guest 2]: So ESPN, in their great wisdom, was showing Euro 96, which was fantastic.
[Guest 2]: And in the breaks between Euro 96, they have bought 10 years of rights to Calcutta League
[Guest 2]: football.
[Guest 2]: OK, and it's a defining moment, because what happened was there was a half an hour gap
[Guest 2]: between matches.
[Guest 2]: They didn't have a studio show.
[Guest 2]: So what they'd do is they'd show a Euro match.
[Guest 2]: And then in the half an hour before the next Euro match, they'd show Calcutta Football
[Guest 2]: League highlights.
[Guest 2]: Esbinghol, Mohun Bagan, Mahmood and Sporting.
[Guest 2]: And I remember my father was there with me because he was on his way.
[Guest 2]: And in those days, I was working for IMGT, and he was on his way to visit my sister in
[Guest 2]: the US.
[Guest 2]: So he was with me.
[Guest 2]: So he used to watch these Euro matches, and then he's suddenly seeing Esbinghol, Mohun
[Guest 2]: Bagan.
[Guest 2]: And you know, suddenly that football is in such sharp contrast, because you're seeing
[Guest 2]: one against the other.
[Guest 2]: And my father actually once really bewildered and looked at me and said, are these guys
[Guest 2]: playing in slow motion?
[Guest 2]: Because suddenly he's seeing what international football looks like.
[Guest 2]: So yes, 30% of it is better cameras, better vision, all that.
[Guest 2]: But 70% of it was that suddenly the game that he thought was perfectly normal to play, an
[Guest 2]: Esbinghol, Mohun Bagan match, was shown in contrast to what international football really
[Guest 2]: looked like.
[Guest 2]: And that's a realization that has happened in Indian sport.
[Guest 2]: And it's a very powerful realization, because suddenly every football team in India today,
[Guest 2]: we are struggling again to get back, because we are saying, OK, you know, our football
[Guest 2]: was 30% world standard, now we are at 55%, 54%, 55%.
[Guest 2]: We are moving there.
[Guest 2]: But clearly, you have a choice of watching an ISL team, or you have a choice of watching
[Guest 2]: Messi or Ronaldo play.
[Guest 2]: And that choice has made things much more difficult for Indian fans, and much more difficult
[Guest 2]: for Indian sport to grow.
[Guest 2]: Because you're suddenly up against, you know, channels don't know loyalty.
[Guest 2]: You know, your remote button knows no loyalty.
[Guest 2]: So that is now a challenge that's facing every part of Indian sport.
[Guest 2]: And perhaps cricket is the best off in that nature, because whatever it is, you know,
[Guest 2]: the IPL, the best cricket players in the world come and play in the IPL.
[Guest 2]: Every other product we have is an inferior product to something you'll see abroad.
[Amit Varma]: So OK, here's my next question.
[Amit Varma]: I just did an episode on the importance of liberalization, the 91 reforms.
[Amit Varma]: And my guest was Shruti Rajgopalan and Ajay Shah.
[Amit Varma]: And right at the end, I asked him that, you know, on what gave them hope and what gave
[Amit Varma]: them despair.
[Amit Varma]: And Ajay gave me an interesting answer.
[Amit Varma]: He said that what gives me hope is that the 91 reforms, even if you've gone backwards
[Amit Varma]: and terrible things are happening now, even if all that has happened, the 91 reforms,
[Amit Varma]: and what happened in the subsequent 20 years till about 2011, showed us that Indians can
[Amit Varma]: achieve anything.
[Amit Varma]: We can compete with the best in the world, we can do anything we want, there are no barriers.
[Amit Varma]: And that knowledge is important, that we don't have to make excuses, we don't have to talk
[Amit Varma]: about our great past or our great civilization or whatever, we can be the best in the present.
[Amit Varma]: And that knowledge is important, at least now, you know, now I have a similar question
[Amit Varma]: about Indian sport, that there was always this assumption.
[Amit Varma]: And I have to say that for a large period of time, even I shared it, that India will
[Amit Varma]: never be a great sporting nation, because of a variety of reasons, like one, of course,
[Amit Varma]: we don't really have a sporting culture, the way kids say in Australia will in their free
[Amit Varma]: time, they'll just go out and play sports.
[Amit Varma]: And over here, they won't do that they may watch some sports, but that sporting culture
[Amit Varma]: isn't there.
[Amit Varma]: And one ascribed various reasons to it, people would say that, you know, it's the genes and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, it's the climate and it's a nutrition, or maybe it's just a vicious cycle of a cultural
[Amit Varma]: practice is not there in the culture.
[Amit Varma]: So it never comes into the culture, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But it seems to me that just as perhaps what Ajay was talking about the, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: post 91 reforms, whatever happened, showing that India can be the best can do anything,
[Amit Varma]: it seems to me that in sport, a similar thing has now happened.
[Amit Varma]: Like when you see Neeraj Chopra win the javelin gold medal, you cannot anymore say that there
[Amit Varma]: is something inherent that is keeping us back.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, Nandan, in your excellent book, Go, you know, you wrote the last chapter of the
[Amit Varma]: book.
[Amit Varma]: And there you spoke about the importance of the Abhinav Bindra moment, that that made
[Amit Varma]: such a difference that, you know, he wins the gold, and suddenly you have this self
[Amit Varma]: confidence that we can do it, which wasn't there earlier.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a bit about the impact that it had, because at one level, it's just a matter
[Amit Varma]: of millimeters, right?
[Amit Varma]: If somebody else had just done a little bit better, he wouldn't have got the gold, he
[Amit Varma]: would have gotten the silver, and we've gotten silver before, would it have made such an
[Amit Varma]: impact?
[Amit Varma]: Did getting that gold?
[Amit Varma]: Was it a seminal moment?
[Amit Varma]: Tell me about kind of what you what you feel about that?
[Guest 1]: Absolutely, Amit.
[Guest 1]: So it was also the time when we had just begun our journey as a foundation, Go Sports Foundation.
[Guest 1]: And our dream was really this is to change the mindset and the belief system of what
[Guest 1]: is possible not just for the athletes, but also for the surrounding ecosystem and people
[Guest 1]: who participate in those journeys and including stakeholders like parents, coaches, school
[Guest 1]: principals, college principals.
[Guest 1]: So the point is that, like you mentioned, there were many, many, many stereotypes in
[Guest 1]: Indian sport, which had actually seeped into the management of sport.
[Guest 1]: So we had these concepts of priority disciplines and non-priority disciplines.
[Guest 1]: Based on that, the government would fund different federations.
[Guest 1]: So if you were a talented athlete in a non-priority sport, you probably had zero chance of making
[Guest 1]: it to the Olympics.
[Guest 1]: So it wasn't talent based, lots of perceptions, I mean, we had limited sports budget.
[Guest 1]: So let's be clear, this was not a priority for many, many, many years, right?
[Guest 1]: So we move towards funding some athletes, we go to the Olympics, most of them are just
[Guest 1]: so happy to get there because of the number of obstacles overcome to get to the Olympics.
[Guest 1]: And I'll just back up before the Abhinav Bindra story to around the same time.
[Guest 1]: At that point, I've gone to the UK, studied in the UK and the US and now come back to
[Guest 1]: India very, very passionate about doing something meaningful in sport, I haven't found what
[Guest 1]: that is yet.
[Guest 1]: But one day, I just get a call from one of my law school colleagues, and he says, Hey,
[Guest 1]: I'm at the Bangalore airport, this is the HAL old airport, and I've just come upon one
[Guest 1]: of the stars of the Indian hockey team.
[Guest 1]: So this guy is trying to get to the Sai Centre, Bangalore, which is pretty far away, it's
[Guest 1]: close to the National Law School, Kingiri.
[Guest 1]: And he's standing at the auto stand, and no auto is willing to take him.
[Guest 1]: So this is an Indian national hockey player.
[Guest 1]: And he said, we got to do something.
[Guest 1]: So like, he literally picks him up, goes and drops him at Sai, comes back and we begin
[Guest 1]: the relationship, like I do things like including filling up his Arjuna Award application, which
[Guest 1]: he eventually gets.
[Guest 1]: But on the day of his Arjuna Award, you know, they do these lots of interviews at the Ashok
[Guest 1]: Hotel.
[Guest 1]: So I'm there, he's talking, and the journalist asks him, so what has the journey been like?
[Guest 1]: And he says, I can't even tell you because we are literally sent out to represent India,
[Guest 1]: telling us, you're going to lose anyway, so just have a good time and come back.
[Guest 1]: And this is our national, I mean, quasi de facto national sport, which we won so much
[Guest 1]: at.
[Guest 1]: So to me, that was such a telling moment and a heartbreaking moment.
[Guest 1]: But what Abhinav's moment was, a lot of people, I think, don't cut him the slack saying he
[Guest 1]: got all the facilities, I think, despite having all the facilities, he still went through
[Guest 1]: the motions of doing whatever it took.
[Guest 1]: And if you read his book, and I really recommend it, A Shorthead History is one of the great
[Guest 1]: sports books worldwide, not even talking Indian book, Rohit Brijnath and him have written
[Guest 1]: fantastically on it, the number of journeys he went through to get there.
[Guest 1]: And to me, that is the moment for Indian sport, which also came around the IPL as well.
[Guest 1]: So 2008 is our 1983 moment or the 1991 moment.
[Guest 1]: Lots changed and lots changed in the mind.
[Guest 1]: And I still talk to Abhinav a lot, and we talk about what it takes to win that medal.
[Guest 1]: And so much of it is in the mind.
[Guest 1]: So you can go to the Olympics, world champion, you can go to the Olympics, world number one,
[Guest 1]: but it's being there.
[Guest 1]: And you can convince yourself all you want, it's just another day.
[Guest 1]: The more and more you try and do that, the tougher and tougher it gets because it's sort
[Guest 1]: of the Olympic moment is between your ears, right?
[Guest 1]: So it's the stadium, but also between your ears.
[Guest 1]: And but what he did is change the self-talk of the Indian athlete.
[Guest 1]: Because it became from if he can do it, I can do it, and then we can do it.
[Guest 1]: So just beginning to connect the dots on what is possible as an Indian.
[Guest 1]: And to me that it needed a single breakthrough as a gold medal, like it needed breakthroughs
[Guest 1]: of different sorts, even Olympic qualification in a sport we thought we were never good at,
[Guest 1]: or did not have a chance in.
[Guest 1]: So each athlete is building on the other and by Abhinav's moment, there had been enough
[Guest 1]: to make that an incremental, but very, very significant moment.
[Guest 1]: And in our book, Rohit Brijnath talks about it, the we can moment of the belief that we
[Guest 1]: can.
[Guest 1]: And a lot of people ask, so we've been through not 12 years of working in Indian sport with
[Guest 1]: our foundation and a lot of people say, okay, what, how do you measure this and tell me
[Guest 1]: what's happened?
[Guest 1]: Is all the money worth it?
[Guest 1]: We put in so much CSR fund, the government fund so much.
[Guest 1]: So what has really changed?
[Guest 1]: And I mean, it certainly helps to have an Olympic medal tally, which is our best ever.
[Guest 1]: But my answer is always, I may not be able to measure it, but qualitatively, I can feel
[Guest 1]: it.
[Guest 1]: I've met athletes over the years, the way they stand, the way they hold them themselves,
[Guest 1]: the way they look you in the eye, what they say, the language of expression, not just
[Guest 1]: how they say things, but what they say has completely changed.
[Guest 1]: And to me, that is indicative of a confident, self-aware, but also well-resourced athlete.
[Guest 1]: And I think we'll get to that of how they've become well-resourced and absolutely critical
[Guest 1]: is knowing that nothing has not been done when you're standing on that, at that shooting
[Guest 1]: range or in the sort of boxing ring, whatever else, the confidence, what is confidence?
[Guest 1]: Confidence is knowing that there was nothing else you could have done to get to where you
[Guest 1]: are and prepared everything that you could have possibly done to deal with uncertainty
[Guest 1]: of competitor, location, various different things.
[Guest 1]: And I think that that transformation was Abhinav's, but it was the transformation of everyone
[Guest 1]: who came before him as well.
[Guest 1]: So bronze turned to silver, silver turned to gold.
[Guest 1]: And I think we've taken a couple of Olympics to get the legacy effect of that.
[Guest 1]: And I'm so glad it happened in this Olympics, it's a huge, huge moment that and a huge load
[Guest 1]: of I think Abhinav's back because I think one of the quotes we have in our book there
[Guest 1]: is that it's great being the first one, but I don't want to be the only one.
[Guest 1]: And I think he's finally got his wish.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah, and in a sense, you could argue that subsequent gold medals also, you know,
[Amit Varma]: have something to do with his gold medal, as you pointed out, I loved your definition
[Amit Varma]: of confidence, because it focuses on process.
[Amit Varma]: I've done everything I can to get here and, you know, and that's your confident and you
[Amit Varma]: just do what you have to do, which is such a wonderful and inspiring definition.
[Amit Varma]: But one of the things that struck me and it struck me also when I read this recent piece
[Amit Varma]: that you wrote in Deccan Herald, is that Indian sports, not just authorities and federations,
[Amit Varma]: but also fans tend to be two results oriented.
[Amit Varma]: In your piece, you were speaking about, you know, the support that athletes need, and
[Amit Varma]: you wrote, quote, career pathways require incremental reward towards the athlete's journey.
[Amit Varma]: Instead, central and state governments reserve huge monetary rewards for medal winners.
[Amit Varma]: While exceptional athletes deserve every accolade, such a system can skew the balance between
[Amit Varma]: process and outcome, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And even when I think about this Olympics, right, Neeraj threw 87 points something, right?
[Amit Varma]: We are all celebrating that because hey, he won the gold.
[Amit Varma]: But what if he hadn't?
[Amit Varma]: You know, Johannes Wetter, for example, I think threw more than 90 meters seven times
[Amit Varma]: this year already.
[Amit Varma]: And it's almost routine for him.
[Amit Varma]: So let's say he hadn't won the gold, but he had thrown 87.
[Amit Varma]: Now, my argument would be that it is deserving of equal celebration.
[Amit Varma]: Equally, you know, somebody was cribbing on Twitter about how our boxing guys and wrestling
[Amit Varma]: guys are placed so high in the world, but they didn't really, you know, win any goals.
[Amit Varma]: And my argument there is it doesn't matter.
[Amit Varma]: This is one event, there's a lot of luck, you can't be two results oriented, the fact
[Amit Varma]: that they're rated so high in the world, they won world championships and all that shows
[Amit Varma]: you that the process is working.
[Amit Varma]: Fans don't often get this, you know, I'm sure sports people obviously do, because that's
[Amit Varma]: the secret of success, right?
[Amit Varma]: You focus on process and not outcome.
[Amit Varma]: But fans don't get this and sporting bodies don't often get this.
[Amit Varma]: Do you see this as a mindset issue that still has to change, that you look at the performance
[Amit Varma]: and not necessarily the result that if Neeraj throws 87.5, that's a great throw regardless
[Amit Varma]: of whether it gets a gold or whether it's outside the top four, which it might well
[Amit Varma]: have been on a different day.
[Amit Varma]: What are your respective thoughts on this?
[Guest 2]: So look, my point about this is that Neeraj winning is a great thing.
[Guest 2]: But I am completely with Nandan.
[Guest 2]: The point is, everyone is not going to understand.
[Guest 2]: Therefore, you'll need a few results, you need an Abhinav, you need a Neeraj.
[Guest 2]: But the point of it is that Nandan is absolutely right.
[Guest 2]: It's process and it's process that gets you to a particular position.
[Guest 2]: The sad bad fact of it is that if you're a cricketer, you're going to get 50 chances
[Guest 2]: through the year to prove whether you're right or wrong.
[Guest 2]: If you're an Olympic athlete, you're basically going to get the Olympics, possibly the Asian
[Guest 2]: Games, possibly the Commonwealth Games.
[Guest 2]: And remember, rarely do you are at least good at both the Asian Games and the Commonwealth
[Guest 2]: Games because the way it's skewed, you know, if you're going safe towards a sprinting event,
[Guest 2]: the Commonwealth Games are a terrible place to be.
[Guest 2]: On the other hand, if you're playing badminton, the Asian Games is probably a more dangerous
[Guest 2]: event.
[Guest 2]: So in any case, you basically have a one in two year chance of actually having a share
[Guest 2]: of mind.
[Guest 2]: That's the pressure that's on the athlete.
[Guest 2]: And that is the fundamental issue that what also happens a lot is and see federations
[Guest 2]: and even the government, everyone is not trusting because we've not had great results before.
[Guest 2]: So very often what happens is we actually keep sending athletes to ranking tournaments
[Guest 2]: to show the government, look, this guy's doing this, this guy's doing that.
[Guest 2]: And a lot of the times, the Chinese and South Koreans, perhaps, you know, they've done more
[Guest 2]: in the sport, they're more adept to the system.
[Guest 2]: So they'll say, look, we're not going to send our athletes here.
[Guest 2]: So a lot of the archery events you'll see, you know, crucial archery events, we remember
[Guest 2]: Deepika Kumari winning a lot.
[Guest 2]: But the South Koreans were not there, the Chinese were not there, they wouldn't come
[Guest 2]: for an event like that.
[Guest 2]: But we needed to because if we didn't go there and Deepika didn't win something, they could
[Guest 2]: turn around and say, you know, Deepika's not really in form.
[Guest 2]: So still as sporting people, even as a federation or a government body, we don't have the confidence.
[Guest 2]: We are not in a position to be able to say, you know, this athlete's good enough, we'll
[Guest 2]: let go of this event, we'll focus on a peak during the Olympics.
[Guest 2]: These are very important things.
[Guest 2]: And I think this is the next stage in maturity.
[Guest 2]: Look, I am already I'm quite happy the fact that we are sending athletes to exposure tours
[Guest 2]: because you know, exposure tours and other tours are much better than not going anywhere
[Guest 2]: and not knowing exactly, you know, you're not sure what food to eat.
[Guest 2]: I remember the horror story that my brother-in-law told me, I think it was Shivnath Singh.
[Guest 2]: And Shivnath Singh was before going to Montreal, he was in Oxford where my brother-in-law was
[Guest 2]: also a Rhodes Scholar, he was there.
[Guest 2]: And he said, the guy just survived, he didn't know what to eat, so he had to survive on
[Guest 2]: bread and milk, because those are the only two things he would understand.
[Guest 2]: And there's nobody to cook for him, there's no diet.
[Guest 2]: And he's saying that this is what's happening to him in the UK where there is a little bit
[Guest 2]: of a support system of us around him.
[Guest 2]: What's going to happen to him in Montreal?
[Guest 2]: And those are the kind of things that, you know, athletes today at least have so much
[Guest 2]: more support, so much more understanding, people around them who are there to take care
[Guest 2]: of this.
[Guest 2]: So yes, we have matured, we've come a long way, I think we need to take the next step
[Guest 2]: and say that if this person is a premier athlete, perhaps not participating in this and peaking
[Guest 2]: in the Olympics is more important than winning this just to prove that he or she is a good
[Guest 2]: athlete.
[Guest 2]: And that's one of the things I'd look at.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, I think that's brilliantly put, like I said, my mother was a cartoonist and I sometimes
[Guest 1]: think of cartoons.
[Guest 1]: I've actually been very upset with Neeraj Chopra because he's destroyed my favorite
[Guest 1]: cartoon.
[Guest 1]: And that had essentially a cave mother talking to her two sons.
[Guest 1]: One of them is kicking around the round thing.
[Guest 1]: And the other is sort of going hunting with a spear.
[Guest 1]: And the mother is telling the young fellow, what do you think you're going to make money
[Guest 1]: kicking this round thing around?
[Guest 1]: Look at your brother, he's throwing a spear, right?
[Guest 1]: And no way you're going to be making money throwing a spear.
[Guest 1]: But I think here's Neeraj Chopra with, I think, tens of crores of reward, destroyed my cartoon
[Guest 1]: along the way, but also has got some very random prizes as well.
[Guest 1]: But I think as Joy puts it, there's things that happen in the system as a result of this
[Guest 1]: type of what I call a bounty system, is that you have, you're going to be rewarded hugely
[Guest 1]: if you're successful, and everyone else is in some sense left behind.
[Guest 1]: It breaks other parts of the system with this hypercompetitivism and also people using shortcuts.
[Guest 1]: There's a strong linkage of even doping because there's no consequence to getting caught.
[Guest 1]: The only consequence is if you don't get caught and you succeed, you might get some large
[Guest 1]: reward.
[Guest 1]: But Joy hit a very important point as well on how funding used to work.
[Guest 1]: And there's been a transformation in the last five, six, seven years with a pretty significant
[Guest 1]: government scheme called the Target Olympic Podium Scheme and how it worked with federations,
[Guest 1]: with other bodies as well.
[Guest 1]: But earlier, what you had was this push to show that you were world class by maintaining
[Guest 1]: rankings.
[Guest 1]: And in many sports, you had to maintain ranking just by playing a lot.
[Guest 1]: So you figured out how to play a lot, and how to game the systems.
[Guest 1]: And I think you've seen lots of examples even in chess of how to become a grandmaster, by
[Guest 1]: even sort of paying off people to lose against you and stuff.
[Guest 1]: So huge amounts of effort, parental effort, athlete effort would be on getting to rankings
[Guest 1]: because funding depended on it.
[Guest 1]: There was a very ad hoc system of how athletes and particularly elite athletes would get
[Guest 1]: funded.
[Guest 1]: It would be given in smaller tranches based on rankings, performance, and it was a limited
[Guest 1]: pool, which lots of people were fighting for, which also led to other stuff like we'd have
[Guest 1]: Wimbledon junior champions, but none of them would progress.
[Guest 1]: You had the Leander who broke through that.
[Guest 1]: But what you had was, while European kids were already playing seniors losing first
[Guest 1]: round, first round, first round, first round for for half a year, before they made it to
[Guest 1]: second round quarterfinals, and then I mean, look at a Roger Federer story, our kids were
[Guest 1]: still playing junior events, because that was the only way to get funded.
[Guest 1]: And those breakages actually make a system because you aren't seeing people progress
[Guest 1]: through the pathways.
[Guest 1]: You have to learn how to lose and get exposed to loss to begin winning.
[Guest 1]: And we didn't have that give in the system.
[Guest 1]: We were willing to fund people who had already proved themselves and how they had got there
[Guest 1]: was I mean, none of our business in some sense, and willing to reward the people who had won.
[Guest 1]: But we had not necessarily seen the journey and the pathway there.
[Guest 1]: And like I said, there were other sort of things like we have priority sports, we have
[Guest 1]: shooting, boxing, wrestling, we are going to say that these are the things worth focusing
[Guest 1]: on, because someone in the past has broken through of their own accord, got some support
[Guest 1]: and proved that Indians are capable of winning a shooting medal, maybe a tennis medal, boxing,
[Guest 1]: wrestling, weightlifting, now everything else, we are not competent.
[Guest 1]: And we convince ourselves, we convince our donors, we convince our government, everyone
[Guest 1]: is convinced that we can't be anything else.
[Guest 1]: We are good at the sports which require dexterity and speed and other things.
[Guest 1]: But don't talk about strength or stamina, running, all of that.
[Guest 1]: We just don't have the genes, like you said, we don't have aptitude, there's no point even
[Guest 1]: trying.
[Guest 1]: And that is a system that has gone through, I would say reformation in the last eight
[Guest 1]: or 10 years.
[Guest 1]: And there are various reasons for that, which we could to chat about too.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, a lot of fascinating stands and big questions to pick up on and I'll come back
[Amit Varma]: to your personal journey at a later point in time.
[Amit Varma]: But first, a few questions, but you know, as far as the cartoon is concerned, it's still
[Amit Varma]: kind of valid because I can guarantee you that the 100 best footballer in the world
[Amit Varma]: makes way more money than the 100 best javelin thrower.
[Amit Varma]: So I don't think you know, that kind of balance sort of remains.
[Amit Varma]: As far as chess, grandmasters, gaming norms, and all that is concerned, that's extreme
[Amit Varma]: outlier.
[Amit Varma]: Those guys don't really get anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: You know, in some obscure corner of the Soviet Union, they'll have these fictitious tournaments
[Amit Varma]: which never even happen and rating is kind of given but that is such an outlier.
[Amit Varma]: It doesn't matter.
[Amit Varma]: One of the strands I want to pick up on is also then these trade offs that you mentioned,
[Amit Varma]: like on the one hand, you know, Joy was talking about the trade off that one when you're supporting
[Amit Varma]: athletes, you want to take them towards sporting excellence.
[Amit Varma]: So you want to space out their training, you want them to peak at the right time.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, you also have to satisfy another constituency and build those narratives
[Amit Varma]: So you send him to random tournaments, which may not otherwise be good for him.
[Amit Varma]: And the necessity of that trade off is worrisome and similar trade off and you mentioned about
[Amit Varma]: Indian kids winning Wimbledon juniors, when people their age are already sort of playing
[Amit Varma]: the senior level.
[Amit Varma]: And this happens in chess also, by the way, that you know, for the last few years, the
[Amit Varma]: best players don't take part in the World Junior Championships because they're already
[Amit Varma]: kind of fighting to get into the actual top 10.
[Amit Varma]: This also sort of reminds me of what happens in women's chess, like people have this misconception
[Amit Varma]: that there is men's chess and women's chess.
[Amit Varma]: But actually, there's no such thing as men's chess, there's an open category where everyone
[Amit Varma]: plays.
[Amit Varma]: And then there's a women's category.
[Amit Varma]: Because for all kinds of reasons, you know, women haven't been able to get results at
[Amit Varma]: the open category, historical reasons, social reasons, whatever, bunch of stuff.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, there have been women who have said that I will not play the women's category,
[Amit Varma]: I will play the open category, I will play with the boys, I don't want a separate category.
[Amit Varma]: And very notably, Judith Polger reached the world top 10 in the open.
[Amit Varma]: And Yifan who dropped out, she was women's world champion, she dropped out of the cycle
[Amit Varma]: and is no longer women's world champion, because she said, I will only play open events.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, a few years ago, there was this player called Alexandra Goryachkina.
[Amit Varma]: So I think when she was 15 and 16, she won the girls junior world championship when she
[Amit Varma]: was 15 and 16.
[Amit Varma]: And juniors was under 20.
[Amit Varma]: And then she said that no, I want to play the open.
[Amit Varma]: And the next few years, she played the open junior championship and finished middle of
[Amit Varma]: the field like 30th, 40th, whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But she continued doing that.
[Amit Varma]: And she's a very strong player today.
[Amit Varma]: But now she's back to playing women's events.
[Amit Varma]: The juniors who would finish around her the male juniors, 30th or 40th are probably earning
[Amit Varma]: nothing.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, she could take part in the women's event and earn much better because that was
[Amit Varma]: sort of spun out.
[Amit Varma]: So similar kind of trade offs in play.
[Amit Varma]: Is it getting better in terms of these trade offs and this perception management, I understand
[Amit Varma]: that private involvement is much more you guys are funding all this, we'll talk in detail
[Amit Varma]: about tops as well.
[Amit Varma]: But is there on the one hand, not just a case for building a great product, but also marketing
[Amit Varma]: that great product to the state, to the government, ki nahi isko bhejna hai, isko kyu bheje?
[Amit Varma]: You know, iska yeh ranking hai, how do you get that ranking?
[Amit Varma]: Is that game still a problem?
[Amit Varma]: Or is there a period in time where that game is becoming less and less of a problem?
[Amit Varma]: Because these results are gradually starting to come through.
[Guest 2]: So I'll pick up on that first, because I think, as I said, Nandan is in that thing of, you
[Guest 2]: know, some of what he's doing is involved with it.
[Guest 2]: Actually, I was, well, I spent six months doing some work with the Ghost Sports Foundation
[Guest 2]: is one of the best things I ever did.
[Guest 2]: But I think it's getting better.
[Guest 2]: I think what had happened right to the start is when tops came, everyone thought, you know,
[Guest 2]: is tops an all or nothing, you know, this is what it is, they're going to fund it, they're
[Guest 2]: going to do it.
[Guest 2]: There are some things that a government cannot do.
[Guest 2]: There are reasons for that.
[Guest 2]: There are government policies, there are government decisions.
[Guest 2]: A simple thing, you know, do you want to fly an athlete business class?
[Guest 2]: Okay, it's a simple thing.
[Guest 2]: Now, it may be necessary for some events, it may not be necessary.
[Guest 2]: But for some events, it may actually be necessary, that kind of extra sleep, that kind of extra
[Guest 2]: rest may be useful.
[Guest 2]: Okay.
[Guest 2]: Now, tops could not do that.
[Guest 2]: It's difficult for tops to do that, given the system that we follow, okay.
[Guest 2]: Or you need a separate physio, and some people are just comfortable with a particular physio,
[Guest 2]: or some people are comfortable that their mother travels with them.
[Guest 2]: Now, that may drop off in time, that person, that athlete may mature in time.
[Guest 2]: But right at the start in their first few tournaments, they may need that family support.
[Guest 2]: Now, those are things that the government cannot do.
[Guest 2]: So what has happened is right in the beginning, there was, you know, everyone thought it's
[Guest 2]: either tops or these private schemes.
[Guest 2]: And I think what's happened over the last three, four years, and especially the last
[Guest 2]: couple of years, very successfully is, both of them have realized that for Indian athletes
[Guest 2]: to succeed, they need to go hand in hand.
[Guest 2]: And in fact, I remember being part of a series of seminars with Olympic athletes, which was
[Guest 2]: all about giving them an understanding of what the idea of India as it were, in a very
[Guest 2]: simple potted, if I would put it, and what Tokyo is all about, and what they could expect
[Guest 2]: to find out there in very practical terms, not just in terms of the sea, but what are
[Guest 2]: Japanese like, what the city is going to be.
[Guest 2]: And it was researched and put together by Ghost Sports Foundation.
[Guest 2]: But the athletes were bought in by tops.
[Guest 2]: And that gives you a little bit of an idea about the fact that these guys are now, they're
[Guest 2]: saying, it's not my product, it's not your product.
[Guest 2]: These athletes win, it's going to be good for all of us.
[Guest 2]: And I think that is the one huge thing in Indian sport that we're seeing.
[Guest 2]: And right into 2015, 16, when tops started, it was all about, it's my way or the highway.
[Guest 2]: And I think everyone now realizes that the only way to make a highway is if everyone
[Guest 2]: gets together to try and build it.
[Guest 1]: I would totally agree.
[Guest 1]: And seeing that experience from the other end as well, I mean, there's no I in team,
[Guest 1]: but there's more than one in Team India, right?
[Guest 1]: So the recognition that there are many, many participants, and every athlete is India's
[Guest 1]: athlete, it's not a government athlete or private athlete or some other scheme.
[Guest 1]: And that really came through in the last five, six years, a recognition that it's a common
[Guest 1]: journey.
[Guest 1]: And everyone has different roles to play.
[Guest 1]: The end of the day, the government is the biggest funder of an activity like sport,
[Guest 1]: huge amounts go into the other programs of athletes, high performance, tournament experts.
[Guest 1]: But at the same time, like Joy mentions, the government is inherently obliged to be transactional.
[Guest 1]: There are protocols it has to follow, there are ways of doing public money.
[Guest 1]: So there's this room to build other things to focus and support the government, complement
[Guest 1]: the government doing things that the government cannot do, or is not yet ready to do.
[Guest 1]: And in many ways, the private involvement is not by any means and a sort of a capture
[Guest 1]: or should not be seen as something which you're doing, which the government should have been
[Guest 1]: doing and you're trying to show the government office not doing it.
[Guest 1]: And that's been the moment that has now come where it feels like everyone is participating
[Guest 1]: knows their role, and is actively pushing a common agenda.
[Guest 1]: And a lot of that credit goes to the people running the top scheme and the sports ministry.
[Guest 1]: That seven medals is actually an under reward for the amount of managerial work, the amount
[Guest 1]: of funding and the amount of support that our contingent got.
[Guest 1]: I'm so glad that we got to seven, but not just the athletes, but everyone who put the
[Guest 1]: work in there, to me deserve more.
[Guest 1]: And the fact that we expected more and feel like we deserve more tells the story that
[Guest 1]: we had our best Olympics, but it could have been and should have been better.
[Amit Varma]: Fabulous.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll get to the details of that in a short while.
[Amit Varma]: But there's a meta question I want to ask first, which is slightly long winded, if you
[Amit Varma]: forgive me, but it's something that I haven't quite been able to reconcile for myself, which
[Amit Varma]: is of state involvement in sport, right?
[Amit Varma]: Which is that for all of these sports, we depend on the state and its federations and
[Amit Varma]: all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And the point is, one has to wonder how that is sort of palatable or justifiable in a country
[Amit Varma]: like India, like in India, 3000 children die in India every day from starvation, one in
[Amit Varma]: four Indian children are malnourished.
[Amit Varma]: This is modern data, we are a desperately poor country, there's an opportunity cost
[Amit Varma]: for money.
[Amit Varma]: And the question is that, is it okay to spend it on a space program or on sports?
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, in my opinion, every reasonable person can argue that we should not be building
[Amit Varma]: giant statues.
[Amit Varma]: But it becomes more thorny when you talk about sports and space programs, because national
[Amit Varma]: pride is tied in with them.
[Amit Varma]: And this reminds me of a story that I sometimes tell about Tolstoy and his chicken.
[Amit Varma]: So essentially, Tolstoy, of course, was vegetarian, and he wrote books about ethical treatment
[Amit Varma]: of animals and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So at one point in time, an aunt of his was coming to dinner.
[Amit Varma]: And she said, I will only eat chicken.
[Amit Varma]: So he said, Okay, fine, come.
[Amit Varma]: So when the aunt gets to the dining table, she finds that there is a live chicken flapping
[Amit Varma]: about on her chair.
[Amit Varma]: And Tolstoy tells her that you wanted chicken, here's your chicken, we're not going to kill
[Amit Varma]: it for you, you do it yourself.
[Amit Varma]: And that seems to me to be a very almost Gandhian demonstration.
[Amit Varma]: And Gandhi was, of course, influenced by Tolstoy, a Gandhian demonstration of the difference
[Amit Varma]: between the chicken on the chair and the chicken on the plate, that they are actually one and
[Amit Varma]: the same.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, we have this mental barrier between it.
[Amit Varma]: And I think we do a similar thing in sport, where we think that government spending on
[Amit Varma]: sport, you know, state funds going into, you know, athletics, and this and that is such
[Amit Varma]: a beautiful, noble thing, and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But there is a cost to it.
[Amit Varma]: And the cost to it at some level, includes the 3000 children dying every day of starvation.
[Amit Varma]: You know, obviously, it is not the case that if the government stopped funding, say, fencing,
[Amit Varma]: children would stop dying.
[Amit Varma]: That's obviously not the case, it would go into somebody's pocket for you know, but that's
[Amit Varma]: a dilemma that we face.
[Amit Varma]: And my sense is that this connection between the state and sport is really because of reasons
[Amit Varma]: that can shade over that essentially has both sides to it.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you could say that it is self respect and esteem of the kind that you know, we might
[Amit Varma]: have felt when we watch Gavaskar play all the defiant innings that he played.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, it's it's this kind of toxic nationalism, you know, Orwell famously
[Amit Varma]: said, sport is war minus the shooting.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, so that's, you know, one counter view to the state in sport, that's kind of
[Amit Varma]: the side that we don't see, I mean, this is a scene in the unseen, so to say, and a follow
[Amit Varma]: up minor question that arises from that is you were drawing the comparison in that cartoon
[Amit Varma]: between football and javelin.
[Amit Varma]: And the point is, why will the kid kicking the ball makes him so much more money, it's
[Amit Varma]: because so many more people watch the sport, they care about football, they deeply care
[Amit Varma]: about it.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a lot of money going into it.
[Amit Varma]: And it's our eyeballs that are directly funding all the sports that we watch, which I'm perfectly
[Amit Varma]: fine with, as it should be.
[Amit Varma]: But you could also argue that a lot of sports, these Olympic sports are perhaps archaic artifacts
[Amit Varma]: that you know, no one would watch if it wasn't for this whole thing of national pride through
[Amit Varma]: sporting expression.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm not taking a stand one way or the other.
[Amit Varma]: I'm raising this because I'm conflicted about it.
[Amit Varma]: Because to me, one of my best moments this year was, you know, when Neeraj won the gold
[Amit Varma]: or other things that I've seen in sport that I otherwise wouldn't, you know, if not for
[Amit Varma]: this, but at the same time, there is this other aspect of it, how does one reconcile
[Amit Varma]: these two?
[Amit Varma]: Is this something that you've thought about?
[Amit Varma]: And also, Nandan, specifically in your case, where you've done so much work, sort of mobilizing
[Amit Varma]: the voluntary action of private individuals towards promoting sport, which is kind of
[Amit Varma]: the way I would really love to see all of it happen, that is there a way of seeing sport
[Amit Varma]: go forward without the necessary involvement of the state, as it is in some sports in other
[Amit Varma]: countries, you know, like the British government doesn't have to promote football, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the Premier League is all there, you know, even the BCCI is kind of independent, and
[Amit Varma]: the IPL is its own ecosystem.
[Amit Varma]: But with other sports, we have to always think of the state getting involved.
[Amit Varma]: So what are your respective thoughts on this?
[Guest 1]: It's a great question, Amit, because it's at the center of I think, the future of Indian
[Guest 1]: sport as well.
[Guest 1]: We do have this notion that if anything goes wrong in sport, it's the government's fault.
[Guest 1]: So I mean, someone like runs with a bull and supposedly runs faster than Usain Bolt, the
[Guest 1]: sports minister is supposed to call him for a trial, someone, I mean, it's literally everything
[Guest 1]: that happens is the government's responsibility with sport.
[Guest 1]: And that's how also a lot of these schemes have been built, there's the government is
[Guest 1]: building the Kilo India youth games, university games, there's a talent scouting, there's
[Guest 1]: sports hostels, infrastructure, name it, and the government is the biggest sports management
[Guest 1]: company in the country.
[Guest 1]: The reality is that a lot of this in the sports governance structure, international sports
[Guest 1]: governance structure is to be done by federations.
[Guest 1]: And we haven't got there yet in transferring in some sense responsibility, but also operational
[Guest 1]: integrity to our federations in a cogent, clear way.
[Guest 1]: Because we've been so government centric, when you ask the government, government will
[Guest 1]: deliver because that's what the population is asking for.
[Guest 1]: What we haven't moved towards is the US model, the US Olympic and Paralympic Committee gets
[Guest 1]: probably zero funding from the government.
[Guest 1]: It is also all sponsor driven, all driven by private enterprise, pushed up by university
[Guest 1]: sport, Europe has club sport.
[Guest 1]: So we found micro enterprises, we found sponsors, we found boosters in different places.
[Guest 1]: For us, other than the BCCI, the government, some state governments are the funder of first
[Guest 1]: resort and the funder of last resort.
[Guest 1]: What it does in some sense is it absolves also a lot of the federations of responsibility,
[Guest 1]: because of the way that the sports governance framework has been built, not to say that
[Guest 1]: all federations are run badly.
[Guest 1]: And I think you saw the results of some well run federations, transformative results in
[Guest 1]: the Olympics as well, including hockey, which I'm sure we'll talk about a little bit more.
[Guest 1]: But the reality is there are dozens and dozens of federations.
[Guest 1]: And I mean, we've had many conferences on this and one of our speakers talked about
[Guest 1]: a bunch of these federations called kitchen table governance, where literally the president
[Guest 1]: and secretary sit in someone's kitchen and run the federation.
[Guest 1]: And there are really no implications for that worldwide federations are supposed to be private
[Guest 1]: autonomous bodies, which may get some funding from the government.
[Guest 1]: But that autonomy is to be enjoyed with certain responsibilities to run tournaments to run
[Guest 1]: events to do talent scouting.
[Guest 1]: So essentially, to deliver talent opportunities, and to convert talent into opportunities and
[Guest 1]: opportunities into competitiveness.
[Guest 1]: And that is where we in some sense have failed when the government doesn't enforce a governance
[Guest 1]: framework where that autonomy is earned.
[Guest 1]: What you end up doing is the government doing all of it in itself, because one constant
[Guest 1]: there, whether the federations do it or the government does it, it's government's money.
[Guest 1]: So either the government's fund the federations, or they do the schemes themselves.
[Guest 1]: Now what what happens is, if you're given that binary choice, saying it's your money,
[Guest 1]: you can either go and execute Halo India games, talent scouting, sports hostels, big infrastructure,
[Guest 1]: yourself and have accountability, or you can pass it on to others, and you may get a report
[Guest 1]: once a year, if you're lucky, which is the one you're going to choose, right.
[Guest 1]: And to me, there is a gap and perhaps Joy can talk a little bit more about it in our
[Guest 1]: willingness to sort of call out federations who aren't doing their job, because at the
[Guest 1]: end of the day, these federations are monopolies by law.
[Guest 1]: And these are not monopolies created by Indian law or any national law.
[Guest 1]: These are self professed monopolies worldwide.
[Guest 1]: So they get their recognition from international bodies, which are also not tied to any country.
[Guest 1]: So they are recognized by the International Federation and claim some like serious dominion
[Guest 1]: over the sport, where you can't move, you can't enter this what is called the sports
[Guest 1]: pyramid without their permission.
[Guest 1]: Now when you're running a monopoly, that monopoly with an autonomy is a pretty sort of challenging
[Guest 1]: dish to serve if you don't have responsibility tied to that.
[Guest 1]: So are you handing over the keys to an entire gamut of activities, from doing events to
[Guest 1]: selecting determining who represents India using the national flag, and in some sense,
[Guest 1]: curating identity of what we are capable of and what we are not.
[Guest 1]: And some of it could just be simply from inaction.
[Guest 1]: So are you saying that you're going to hand over the keys and you're not you don't care
[Guest 1]: if the person starts the engine, right?
[Guest 1]: And that is where there are gaps.
[Guest 1]: And if we want to move from this government funded, we will do everything because people
[Guest 1]: expect us to do we will enable build the legal frameworks and I'm a lawyer and I'll always
[Guest 1]: come from that, build the infrastructure that needs to be built that I mean, land and power
[Guest 1]: of the state are the only things that the state really has monopoly over, get experts
[Guest 1]: to do the work of each sport.
[Guest 1]: But that is going to come you're going to get private participation, you're going to
[Guest 1]: get private enterprise, when there is accountability and responsibility, and a fair chance to participate
[Guest 1]: on decent terms for private enterprise to come in and not get kicked out in two or three
[Guest 1]: years because something else has grown better or that investment is not protected.
[Guest 1]: And we've seen so many examples of this in Indian sport, multiple leagues, multiple different
[Guest 1]: examples where private enterprise, you come and take the risk, if it turns out well, we
[Guest 1]: will co-opt and we don't need you anymore.
[Guest 1]: If you're losing money, keep continuing to lose money and we're thankful to you.
[Guest 1]: And I'm sure Joy has a lot to say on this topic.
[Guest 2]: No, absolutely.
[Guest 2]: And I think where I'm going to start off, first and foremost, you know, every year,
[Guest 2]: there's a dance.
[Guest 2]: Okay.
[Guest 2]: It's a dance between what they call SAI and the Ministry of Sports and the federations.
[Guest 2]: So SAI and the Ministry of Sport have a particular budget to dole out to federations.
[Amit Varma]: For my listeners, we should elaborate SAI is a sports authority of India.
[Guest 2]: Sports authority of India.
[Guest 2]: So every year, all these federations go out there and they have their plans and they say,
[Guest 2]: this is what we're going to do, give us some money.
[Guest 2]: Okay.
[Guest 2]: And 90% of the federations will get money from no other source other than this.
[Guest 2]: You know, they'll put out an auction to say, where will we hold the nationals?
[Guest 2]: And somebody who will do the nationals because, you know, they want to do it this year and
[Guest 2]: they want to be probably president next year.
[Guest 2]: And they'll do it in a particular city and they'll do it in a particular way.
[Guest 2]: This is the cycle followed.
[Guest 2]: So I just want to tell you about something about the federation, which is actually fairly
[Guest 2]: well done because I've worked with it, which is the football federation.
[Guest 2]: And I remember in 2015, we were working on the under 17 football world cup.
[Guest 2]: And so we were required to present to the All India Football Federation general body
[Guest 2]: meeting that, you know, how is the world cup progressing?
[Guest 2]: So we are there for the meeting.
[Guest 2]: And just before us, there's a few points of order.
[Guest 2]: So the general secretary of the football federation turns around and says, and Baitung Bhutia
[Guest 2]: is there at the meeting.
[Guest 2]: And I think he's also there for some other reason to talk about some of the projects.
[Guest 2]: And mind you, so all these guys who have come to this meeting are guys who have been flown
[Guest 2]: in by the All India Football Federation.
[Guest 2]: They'll stay for two days at a hotel, they'll attend these meetings and they'll go back.
[Guest 2]: Maybe each of them, you know, each state, probably a lakh of rupees is being spent just
[Guest 2]: to bring them here.
[Guest 2]: So one of the points of order was that they said that, you know, the registration fees
[Guest 2]: for each local federation is 500 rupees, 500 rupees a year for a local state federation.
[Guest 2]: And they said that, you know, that has to be increased because, you know, there's a
[Guest 2]: lot of paperwork, you're increasing it to 10,000 rupees a year because, you know, that's
[Guest 2]: about how much.
[Guest 2]: And four federations, including India's most popular state, caught up and said, how can
[Guest 2]: you do that?
[Guest 2]: 10,000 rupees?
[Guest 2]: How can we afford it?
[Guest 2]: And at that point, Baitung Bhutia, who was there, he just could not believe it.
[Guest 2]: And he says that, you know, if in India's most popular state, the world's most popular
[Guest 2]: game cannot raise 10,000 rupees, then probably the wrong people are running it.
[Guest 2]: And there was chaos in that meeting and everything.
[Guest 2]: But that was so absolutely true.
[Guest 2]: I'll tell you something, Amit.
[Guest 2]: A lot of the people who are running these federations and a lot of, they are good federations
[Guest 2]: as Nandan will, you know, hasten to tell you and as I will, okay.
[Guest 2]: But in 90 percent of cases, it's not just the fact that the federations are corrupt
[Guest 2]: because they are.
[Guest 2]: Many of them are corrupt.
[Guest 2]: But in a lot of cases, they are just unable.
[Guest 2]: So if you turn on and give a federation two crores and say, okay, do a national game which
[Guest 2]: is proper, they wouldn't know how to do it because they don't know how to deal with those
[Guest 2]: kinds of sums of money.
[Guest 2]: They don't know how to scale up.
[Guest 2]: A lot of them don't know how to use a computer properly.
[Guest 2]: A lot of them wouldn't be able to use an Excel sheet.
[Guest 2]: So the problem is that Indian sport is hugely undermined by the federations.
[Guest 2]: And I'll tell you why this has happened.
[Guest 2]: In early days, you know, suppose your table tennis, okay, now table tennis was played
[Guest 2]: and there were certain places, you know.
[Guest 2]: So Maharashtra had some table tennis, Kerala had some table tennis, Bengal had some table
[Guest 2]: tennis, railways had some table tennis.
[Guest 2]: The other states, they were not that strong in table tennis, Assam had some table tennis.
[Guest 2]: What would happen is suppose your Uttarakhand table tennis.
[Guest 2]: So somebody who wants to win the next elections inside the Table Tennis Federation would ask
[Guest 2]: a cousin or relative, somebody in Uttarakhand and say, hey, do you want to be the head of
[Guest 2]: the Uttarakhand Table Tennis Federation?
[Guest 2]: And they'll think, hey, why not?
[Guest 2]: They said, look, you're going to come down for the national games, you'll get a couple
[Guest 2]: of free trips a year, all you need to do is vote for me.
[Guest 2]: And you don't really need to know anything about table tennis.
[Guest 2]: So that's how a lot of these state federations sort of started putting their own people in,
[Guest 2]: voters in, often who had nothing to do with the game.
[Guest 2]: And what we are dealing with is still that system.
[Guest 2]: We are dealing with that system, those people, and therefore also one incompetent people,
[Guest 2]: be people who don't know the game, see people who have no idea what to do if money actually
[Guest 2]: comes into the sport because they're not capable of running.
[Guest 2]: And those are the essential problems that we are dealing with.
[Guest 2]: As I said, you know, Nandan will tell you, at this point in time, I don't think the lack
[Guest 2]: of money is India's problem at all in sport.
[Guest 2]: There is enough money.
[Guest 2]: And if you go to the private sector, and you tell them that, okay, this is a project we
[Guest 2]: can do, and this is a project, these are the deliverables, and this is how we can do it,
[Guest 2]: you can raise the money.
[Guest 2]: It's lack of competency, it's the federations who are the roadblocks.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, extremely insightful points, and speaking of lack of competency, speaking
[Amit Varma]: about people who might not know what to do if the money comes to them.
[Amit Varma]: And also the very valid point that you made that these are not necessarily bad people.
[Amit Varma]: All of this gets me to thinking about structure and incentives.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something I think we might have discussed in the last episode we did together
[Amit Varma]: and Nandan just alluded to it.
[Amit Varma]: So as you know, Nandan mentioned, all our federations through accidents of circumstances
[Amit Varma]: or whatever, the way sporting federations throughout the world have evolved is that
[Amit Varma]: one they are monopolies, two they are also monopsonies.
[Amit Varma]: So not only will say the Federation of archery have a monopoly on archery, anyone who wants
[Amit Varma]: to do archery has to, you know, register with the Federation and play under their auspices
[Amit Varma]: or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But they also have no one else to sell their services to, which makes them incredibly powerful.
[Amit Varma]: And without any accountability, where does accountability come from, it typically comes
[Amit Varma]: from competition.
[Amit Varma]: Now, in this case, within their sport, their monopolies and monopsonies, you could argue
[Amit Varma]: that each sport is competing with every other sport.
[Amit Varma]: So that might be a kind of accountability.
[Amit Varma]: But that plays out only over the long run, and is no relief to say a current archer who
[Amit Varma]: finds that you know, there is deep nepotism within his federation or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: Also, as far as the question of autonomy and accountability come, this becomes a very difficult
[Amit Varma]: balance, I would imagine, because, you know, a government can say that, okay, ex federation,
[Amit Varma]: you are now autonomous.
[Amit Varma]: But to keep you accountable, these are the following reporting procedures you will have
[Amit Varma]: to follow or benchmarks you will have to meet, because that still gives the state a certain
[Amit Varma]: amount of power over them and power always corrupts.
[Amit Varma]: And these inevitably become sort of rent seeking operations.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what we saw on cricket and where the IPL was so good, is that the IPL proved a
[Amit Varma]: jugaadu way out of the monopsony problem, that if you were a cricketer, you weren't
[Amit Varma]: only selling your talent to the BCCI, you could sell your talent separately to, you
[Amit Varma]: know, Mumbai Indians or Royal Challengers or whatever, you had these people competing
[Amit Varma]: for your services.
[Amit Varma]: And you also had these people competing to discover new talent, because that's how the
[Amit Varma]: incentives suddenly worked in that new structure.
[Amit Varma]: So you still had BCCI, which is a monopoly and a monopsony and which used that monopsonistic
[Amit Varma]: power to shut down the ICL, for example, and to make sure no one would compete with it.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, that jugaadu set up within it of the IPL, where there is competition on
[Amit Varma]: all fronts, made the lives of so many Indian cricketers much better off to the extent that
[Amit Varma]: I imagine if the IPL had been around when you had to make a difficult choice, then you
[Amit Varma]: might well have thought, okay, no, there are so many options, I'll just continue with cricket.
[Amit Varma]: One doesn't know.
[Amit Varma]: But on the margins, I think that would be the kind of difference that they could be
[Amit Varma]: there.
[Amit Varma]: Now, how do we get past this is what I kind of don't understand.
[Amit Varma]: Because it seems to me that these structures are things that we are stuck with.
[Amit Varma]: And this is not a uniquely Indian problem.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, because rent seeking is so natural and inherent to our entire systems of governance.
[Amit Varma]: This just fits into that.
[Amit Varma]: But this problem of federations, which are monopoly and monopsony are true, all across
[Amit Varma]: the world, it just permeates through.
[Amit Varma]: So what are the ways through that?
[Amit Varma]: Is there a point at which this just becomes something that we have to excel in spite of?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it possible to reform the system in structural ways that I possibly, you know,
[Amit Varma]: can't imagine, but you're a lawyer, and then you've thought about the structural aspects
[Amit Varma]: of this, obviously, and how rules of the game can reform a system like this.
[Amit Varma]: So I'd love insights from both of you, because both of you have, you know, while I am really
[Amit Varma]: spouting theory right now, both of you have been on the ground, no doubt, you know, running
[Amit Varma]: into countless frustrations dealing with these federations and, you know, coming from people
[Amit Varma]: who are otherwise perfectly good human beings and good individuals and well meaning people,
[Amit Varma]: but they're responding to the incentives of the system.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, Amit, great question.
[Guest 1]: It's not an easy answer.
[Guest 1]: I will have to preface by saying governance is an incredibly difficult job in sport.
[Guest 1]: Sport in general has so many different stakeholders.
[Guest 1]: And everyone is coming with different interests, very, very different interests.
[Guest 1]: So an athlete may have an interest, the parent may have a completely different interest from
[Guest 1]: the athlete.
[Guest 1]: So might the coach, you'll have teams, you have federations, you have the government,
[Guest 1]: you have private enterprise, you have sponsors trying to come in, you have broadcasters.
[Guest 1]: So there's a whole bunch of people consider it people trying to take from some sort of
[Guest 1]: a pot.
[Guest 1]: And there's a there's a great story that Rahul Dravid tells about what a team environment
[Guest 1]: is about.
[Guest 1]: He talks about it being a pot of energy, which every individual has to give to so that they
[Guest 1]: can take from right and particularly relevant, I think in a sport like cricket, which is
[Guest 1]: an individual sport in a team environment.
[Guest 1]: And that is really what sport is, is that there are multiple people trying to give a
[Guest 1]: little and take a lot from sport.
[Guest 1]: And what is governance?
[Guest 1]: Governance is balancing these various interests in the sort of keeping the interests of sport,
[Guest 1]: this sort of mythical beast, the interest of sport as the priority.
[Guest 1]: So you will take the money from the broadcaster, but what sort of rights will you give the
[Guest 1]: broadcaster in return?
[Guest 1]: You will allow the athlete an opportunity to train, but what if the athlete is not doing
[Guest 1]: things sincerely?
[Guest 1]: So there's constantly people trying to give less and take more from sport.
[Guest 1]: And in general, really sport determines when you get something back, you really can't be
[Guest 1]: extractive.
[Guest 1]: And the issue is when you have governance in a way that is not structured with accountability,
[Guest 1]: the ability to be extractive with participation of people who are in the federations goes
[Guest 1]: up.
[Guest 1]: So already a difficult task with some misaligned incentives.
[Guest 1]: What has changed in more recent years is the emergence of the sort of excellent athlete
[Guest 1]: from federations who have really not maybe done that much in time as well.
[Guest 1]: And to me, a little bit of this competition issue was solved by this target Olympic podium
[Guest 1]: scheme, which was really agnostic to which sport you came from.
[Guest 1]: If you showed Olympic qualification or podium potential, they would pick you and then also
[Guest 1]: work with the federation to make sure everything was okay.
[Guest 1]: So it became almost an Indian Olympic program, which didn't go into priority sport, which
[Guest 1]: federation, it looked at each athlete as an individual.
[Guest 1]: What it did is it brought people together and said, come and help us.
[Guest 1]: Do you have an athlete in some sense that deserves this?
[Guest 1]: Come and present.
[Guest 1]: We've had wonderful cases of people who have never qualified for the Olympics before from
[Guest 1]: their sport now progressively come from a foundation like ours.
[Guest 1]: So we had the first fencer make it to the Olympics.
[Guest 1]: That person got a chance because, this is we're talking about Bhavani Devi, because
[Guest 1]: the Tamil Nadu state government supported her.
[Guest 1]: We as a foundation supported her at a point when she was considering quitting sport.
[Guest 1]: And I think she's gone on record to say we had the selection interview.
[Guest 1]: If we had not selected her and she didn't expect to be selected because fencing and
[Guest 1]: why fencing, she was going to quit the sport.
[Guest 1]: And the reality is for five or six years, we worked with her, the government, and eventually
[Guest 1]: the top scheme took over, which is a fantastic public private collaboration, because it was
[Guest 1]: something that the government could not have really funded when you have 150 other athletes
[Guest 1]: in line above her.
[Guest 1]: Why would you pick a fencer when India's never qualified at fencing?
[Guest 1]: So what you got was in some sense, this Jugaadu, like the equivalent of an IPL, multiple different
[Guest 1]: people trying to solve problems together.
[Guest 1]: In some sense, problems that could not be solved by the other was solved and handed
[Guest 1]: over in a way that when the person was ready for that support.
[Guest 1]: So in some sense, the success of these last six or seven years has been that collaboration
[Guest 1]: between the private and the public, the Federation's recognizing a little bit more that having
[Guest 1]: an excellent high performance athlete is not always a threat.
[Guest 1]: And I think it's an opportunity as well to grow your sport.
[Guest 1]: I know it sounds absurd when I say that, I mean, you would expect you want top class
[Guest 1]: athletes, but many of them are just happy to not be in the limelight to just do their
[Guest 1]: own thing along the side, travel to the Olympics, even if you don't have a athlete at the Olympics,
[Guest 1]: you might be handball Federation or something that you're going to the Olympics without
[Guest 1]: a team there.
[Guest 1]: But suddenly you have an athlete, there's a gradual recognition of the opportunity a
[Guest 1]: prime athlete in a sport sort of can deliver.
[Guest 1]: And we've seen that in many ways, you look at it as the athlete as sort of top of the
[Guest 1]: pyramid in an ecosystem in the way that you have sort of a predator, the health of the
[Guest 1]: predators, the health of the system.
[Guest 1]: And we've seen like you take a fencer, you suddenly expose the system to a fencer.
[Guest 1]: What happens?
[Guest 1]: People learn about fencing, physiotherapists learn how to deal with a fencer, coaches sort
[Guest 1]: of have to upgrade their skills.
[Guest 1]: So suddenly a system starts working.
[Guest 1]: And sometimes all it takes is one athlete.
[Guest 1]: And this is not even one athlete winning a gold medal or any medal, making that leap
[Guest 1]: to be good enough to get prominence.
[Guest 1]: What is the Olympics greatest stage on earth, attention is directed towards the Olympics.
[Guest 1]: And we have to figure out how to capture the value of not just the medals, but all of these
[Guest 1]: breakthrough achievements.
[Guest 1]: And we failed in many instances.
[Guest 1]: So the previous Olympics, the thing we as Go Sports Foundation are proudest of was Deepak
[Guest 1]: Karmakar, a gymnast.
[Guest 1]: What have we done five years later, I mean, we had a gymnast qualified through the sort
[Guest 1]: of solidarity quota, but we have not developed a pathway, we have not developed a legacy,
[Guest 1]: this brilliant, brilliant achievement by this girl coming forth at the Olympics.
[Guest 1]: Have we captured the value in the performance system?
[Guest 1]: No.
[Guest 1]: Have we captured the value of that performance more broadly in society?
[Guest 1]: My guess is perhaps not.
[Guest 1]: And while things are improving, we really have to be clear on why we're going after
[Guest 1]: the medals, and to build a legacy plan for every single medal, but also every single
[Guest 1]: breakthrough sort of achievement.
[Guest 1]: You have your first equestrian for Mirza, you have your first female sailor, you have
[Guest 1]: your first fencer, what does that mean?
[Guest 1]: Are you out there building the next generation in 10 years, in 15 years?
[Guest 1]: Are you going to have your Abhinav Bindra moment, where a 10 or 12 year old who's watched
[Guest 1]: that achievement, goes through the cycle and is ready to emulate?
[Guest 1]: And those are the questions to ask in the setup of competition, but also the building
[Guest 1]: of pathways, they're connected.
[Guest 1]: To answer very briefly your question in a sort of a legal technical manner, the issue
[Guest 1]: of autonomy, accountability and interference is a very live one.
[Guest 1]: It's in fact in the courts in the Delhi High Court, one of my friends Rahul Mehra has been
[Guest 1]: fighting this battle for, for years and years, I think he's not very well liked for obvious
[Guest 1]: reasons by the federations, but looking back 20 years from now, I think we will thank him
[Guest 1]: for what he has done in terms of building wonderful legal precedent on recognizing the
[Guest 1]: public function that these bodies play.
[Guest 1]: So what is now the public function test for private organizations that the sports bodies
[Guest 1]: might be.
[Guest 1]: What we do have is a sports code, which is essentially an accountability framework, saying
[Guest 1]: we'll recognize your autonomy, but it is conditional autonomy, I mean, you're an autonomous vehicle,
[Guest 1]: you still have to follow the rules of the road.
[Guest 1]: You can't be an autonomous, random vehicle, you'll be crashing into people and other vehicles.
[Guest 1]: So there's standards, it's financial integrity, operational integrity, are you holding enough
[Guest 1]: tournaments?
[Guest 1]: But the sad part is, and I've been on a committee to try and reform that we have a 2011 version
[Guest 1]: of the court.
[Guest 1]: That's not passed.
[Guest 1]: I mean, there's an element of people in the power with the power to change things, being
[Guest 1]: stakeholders and not being changed.
[Guest 1]: Even the existing one is not being implemented to the fullest extent possible, because there
[Guest 1]: are just too many lapses to justify inaction.
[Guest 1]: And if you're going to give people the keys, like I said, you have to make sure that they're
[Guest 1]: driving the engine.
[Guest 1]: And while we can take the government to task if we perform badly, the likely outcome is
[Guest 1]: that you're going to have more and more and more centralization and government doing and
[Guest 1]: solving.
[Guest 1]: If you do not fix the ability and the accountability on federations, or otherwise going to continue
[Guest 1]: to enjoy the sort of the benefits of power without the responsibility, because in some
[Guest 1]: sense, the job has been outsourced to the government.
[Guest 1]: And you're seeing results, you're seeing things happen.
[Guest 1]: And those collaborations will be very limited collaborations.
[Guest 1]: So do you want to get there?
[Guest 1]: Yes, number one, fix the sports code, fix accountability framework.
[Guest 1]: Number two, and sort of an underdone aspect of sport law in India, and again, committed
[Guest 1]: from regulatory perspective, is the role of competition law, antitrust law, and how it
[Guest 1]: applies to sport situations.
[Guest 1]: It's evolved quite a bit in Europe.
[Guest 1]: So EU law on competition is significant.
[Guest 1]: You're seeing much more private participation, like there's a very famous case of the skating
[Guest 1]: union.
[Guest 1]: There's a swimming, swimming league case, you're seeing more and more the separation
[Guest 1]: of the regulatory function and the commercial function of sports federations, with the right
[Guest 1]: of private enterprise to not step on the toes of federations in their regulatory function,
[Guest 1]: but have a neutral entry point to use stadia to use players.
[Guest 1]: I mean, there's a lot of different things going on, making sure that players don't get
[Guest 1]: banned for playing in what are called private leagues.
[Guest 1]: But I mean, the US is full of private leagues, right?
[Guest 1]: Sort of 360 days of the year, you're playing private leagues, five days a year, you're
[Guest 1]: sort of going in representing your country.
[Guest 1]: So there's a lot of legal structural frameworks that need work.
[Guest 1]: I don't think we got there yet, we're still sort of not even enforcing the frameworks
[Guest 1]: we do have yet.
[Guest 2]: I'm not even going to, Nandan has taught me a lot over the last couple of years I've been
[Guest 2]: dealing with him, especially, you know, with regard to the Volleyball Federation of India
[Guest 2]: and whatever else that's happening.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I think the base of it is the truth is that, you know, first take a name like
[Guest 2]: BCCI, Board of Control, understand the words, control for cricket in India.
[Guest 2]: It's about controlling things.
[Guest 2]: And mind you, let's be honest, the BCCI has done the best job in the country of having
[Guest 2]: age level competitions, of making sure money comes into the system of empowering the system,
[Guest 2]: and with all their internal politics, and there's been a lot of it, and you know, nobody
[Guest 2]: needs to talk about it, they've actually been not allowed most of that to get on to the
[Guest 2]: field.
[Guest 2]: In fact, I feel 80s and 90s, BCCI was far more, you know, far more on the field was
[Guest 2]: being impacted by what was happening inside boardrooms, I think much less is now.
[Guest 2]: And I think those separations have happened.
[Guest 2]: So two things I want to talk about, and I think, you know, a couple of years back, Nandan
[Guest 2]: spoke about a very important point, which is that, what happens is that suppose you
[Guest 2]: have something like a sports court saying, you know, this is what happens.
[Guest 2]: Now, where do satraps in the federation, where do satraps in the ministry get power?
[Guest 2]: They get power in the cracks, they get power in the places which are ambiguous.
[Guest 2]: Whenever there's something ambiguous, then I sort of as a federation official have a
[Guest 2]: right to decide, I'll go this way or that way.
[Guest 2]: What we are trying to do or what people like Nandan are trying to do is making it as unambiguous
[Guest 2]: as possible.
[Guest 2]: This is the rule, this is how it works.
[Guest 2]: But when you make things unambiguous, the people in power don't have power, they have
[Guest 2]: to follow rules.
[Guest 2]: So there's a constant battle in every organization between people who are saying, can I make
[Guest 2]: as fair and transparent rule as possible?
[Guest 2]: And people saying that, if it is completely fair and completely transparent, I don't have
[Guest 2]: any power.
[Guest 2]: So that's the battle that's going on now.
[Guest 2]: And mind you, that's at a level which is always going to happen, okay?
[Guest 2]: At the lower level than that, it's a simple thing.
[Guest 2]: If you're a federation, how does a sport develop?
[Guest 2]: A sport develops when you actually build a sport, when more games are held.
[Guest 2]: Now, if the only thing a federation is doing is pitching to the government saying, okay,
[Guest 2]: national games will be held and that's all I have, then you're not really building the
[Guest 2]: sport.
[Guest 2]: So a lot of these federations don't really want to go out and get too many sponsors because
[Guest 2]: it's difficult.
[Guest 2]: And if I get a sponsor, it means I have to deliver them a product, I have to show them,
[Guest 2]: I have to put up their banners, I have to put it on TV because they're going to ask
[Guest 2]: these questions.
[Guest 2]: And look, I either am not efficient enough to do it, or I don't want to be called into
[Guest 2]: question because somebody will ask me, yeah, I've given you 30 lakhs, what have you done
[Guest 2]: with it?
[Guest 2]: They don't want to be accountable.
[Guest 2]: So those are basic, basic issues and we dealt with the Volleyball Federation, this is one
[Guest 2]: of the things that we realized that A, that once you deal with these people or once you
[Guest 2]: deal with them, firstly, the laws of the land and what Nandan was alluding to, say that
[Guest 2]: they have absolutely no power, there's something called restraint of trade.
[Guest 2]: You cannot stop me from making a living.
[Guest 2]: So for example, if there is a Volleyball League and I start another Volleyball League, there
[Guest 2]: is no way anyone can stop me from allowing players in my league to make a living.
[Guest 2]: So legally, and there's a huge amount of precedent in this, restraint of trade is something that
[Guest 2]: has never been used efficiently in India, but it's there.
[Guest 2]: And if tomorrow you want to pull it out, you will.
[Guest 2]: And I think the first changes have already happened.
[Guest 2]: And I'll give you a very good example, Kabaddi.
[Guest 2]: So Kabaddi, we all know, Mashal sport came and before that, the Kabaddi Federation, nobody's
[Guest 2]: ever heard of, Kabaddi nobody's heard of.
[Guest 2]: Charu Sharma comes in, he speaks to Anand Mahindra, who introduces him to a lot of friends.
[Guest 2]: They get together, they start the Kabaddi League and to their eternal credit, Starr
[Guest 2]: says, let's throw our weight behind it.
[Guest 2]: And they do, they really do in terms of the amount of publicity they give it, the amount
[Guest 2]: of space they give it, how well they put it together.
[Guest 2]: It's a lesson, it's an object lesson because it's not an easy sport to make that popular,
[Guest 2]: but they did it.
[Guest 2]: Now here's what happens.
[Guest 2]: What we don't know, don't talk about is, in these four, five years that the Kabaddi League
[Guest 2]: has been operating, the Federation has changed three times over again, because once money
[Guest 2]: has come into the Federation, all these guys are saying, look, all these guys are making
[Guest 2]: so much money.
[Guest 2]: Why are we not making money?
[Guest 2]: So you need to pay me.
[Guest 2]: And Mashal sports must have told them or Starr sports must have told them where to exactly
[Guest 2]: to go and put what their demands are.
[Guest 2]: And they would have said, OK, we've changed it.
[Guest 2]: So if you really follow the small print, you'll realize that in 2019 or 20, the Kabaddi Federation
[Guest 2]: changed and they awarded the rights of the next Kabaddi League to Sony.
[Guest 2]: Nobody even knows about it because by that time, every player knew that there's no point
[Guest 2]: following this.
[Guest 2]: They just went to Mashal, they joined the Kabaddi League, and it went on as it did.
[Guest 2]: So the most interesting thing I want to tell you is this year, there was a tender which
[Guest 2]: had actually been taken out by Mashal sports saying, OK, these are for the media rights,
[Guest 2]: which were finally again acquired by Starr.
[Guest 2]: But the interesting thing was not that the media rights were spelled out or the PQL was
[Guest 2]: spelled out.
[Guest 2]: What is interesting is that in that one notice, there was not one mention about the Kabaddi
[Guest 2]: Federation.
[Guest 2]: Clearly, they were charting their own path.
[Guest 2]: And I think that's what's going to happen.
[Guest 2]: Nandan knows a little bit about our journey.
[Guest 2]: In volleyball, we had the same thing.
[Guest 2]: The International Volleyball Federation came down for our finals because they thought here
[Guest 2]: in India, which is probably the largest democracy in the world, 1.3 billion people, there's
[Guest 2]: a sport and you actually got a good product.
[Guest 2]: And then all sorts of things happened because people got greedy.
[Guest 2]: But what's happened as a result is we are launching a volleyball league once again.
[Guest 2]: And this time it's without the Federation.
[Guest 2]: And can I tell you, Amit, why it's without the Federation?
[Guest 2]: Because people think very practically.
[Guest 2]: So every time you go to a team and say, invest money, they say, OK, fine, we'll invest money.
[Guest 2]: So when will I make money?
[Guest 2]: You say, OK, sport is a long gestation period.
[Guest 2]: So you say four years, five years, you're going to make money.
[Guest 2]: They said, boss, if this league is successful for the first three years, the Federation
[Guest 2]: tomorrow will get greedy and will throw you guys out and find somebody else, which has
[Guest 2]: happened in badminton, which has happened in wrestling, which has happened in five other
[Guest 2]: sports.
[Guest 2]: So why should I invest money?
[Guest 2]: Because the moment it gets good, the Federation will throw us out because they'll then get
[Guest 2]: greedy and want money.
[Guest 2]: So then we discovered that the only way to actually assure people that your investment
[Guest 2]: is protected is to say, this has nothing to do with the Federation.
[Guest 2]: Because the moment the Federation comes into effect, if people are greedy enough, they'll
[Guest 2]: just turn around and say that, hey, boss, this is making money.
[Guest 2]: Why am I?
[Guest 2]: I'm sitting out here, and I'm not making any money.
[Guest 2]: And here are these teams.
[Guest 2]: And they're very simple things.
[Guest 2]: They look at athletes staying in five-star hotels or four-star hotels with gyms, and
[Guest 2]: they wonder, these are the athletes that we used to give rice and dal to and sambar to
[Guest 2]: for breakfast in the nationals.
[Guest 2]: Why are they staying in five-star hotels?
[Guest 2]: Obviously, there's a lot of money, which means I need that money.
[Guest 2]: So these are the problems that affect Indian sport.
[Guest 2]: And if you don't break free of that, if you don't create a system, and it's not as if
[Guest 2]: it's in the president over the world.
[Guest 2]: I mean, USA basketball has nothing to do with the NBA.
[Guest 2]: The NBA is a group of owners who get together, and they play the sport.
[Guest 2]: And in fact, in 92, when the Dream Team happened, it was a huge negotiation between the NBA
[Guest 2]: and USA basketball.
[Guest 2]: And that's exactly how it is in whether it's American football, a host of other places.
[Guest 2]: The fact of the matter is that if you're not competent to run the federation, at least
[Guest 2]: let private enterprise get a chance.
[Guest 2]: And that doesn't mean that tomorrow, if, for example, the federation starts a league of
[Guest 2]: their own, which is successful, bully for them.
[Guest 2]: Fantastic.
[Guest 2]: Then guys will get two leagues to play with, or three leagues to play with, and there's
[Guest 2]: nothing better than that competition.
[Guest 2]: As Matt Ridley said, all of us sort of, Matt Ridley's are both our gurus, and we all talk
[Guest 2]: about competition and how it develops, and it's fantastic.
[Guest 2]: But you need to do that for sport.
[Guest 2]: And that's where I think, over the next few years, Indian sport will take the next few
[Amit Varma]: steps.
[Amit Varma]: So this is eye opening for me.
[Amit Varma]: And before I go on to the next question, I want to make a brief point because I thought
[Amit Varma]: what you said about power often coming from ambiguity in rules is very wise and applies
[Amit Varma]: to a lot more than sport.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, if you just look at the Indian Constitution, you look at the caveats to free speech, which
[Amit Varma]: are there in Article 19.
[Amit Varma]: And there are vague things like public order, morality, decency, whatever, which can be
[Amit Varma]: interpreted by a bureaucrat or a police constable any way he wants.
[Amit Varma]: And that ambiguity is a problem.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, what lawyers like Nandan perhaps spend their lifetimes doing is just, you know,
[Amit Varma]: sub clause or sub clause, make it as specific as possible, don't let people mess around.
[Amit Varma]: So my next question is kind of a follow up to this, like Nandan, you spoke about how
[Amit Varma]: in Europe, and I wasn't aware of this.
[Amit Varma]: So please enlighten me, that you spoke about how in Europe, there is now this distinction
[Amit Varma]: being drawn between regulatory and commercial, that it's okay for a federation that governs
[Amit Varma]: a sport, which has through circumstance achieved at monopoly and monopsony, it's okay for them
[Amit Varma]: to continue regulating the sport.
[Amit Varma]: But as far as a commercial is concerned, that that has to be open to competition.
[Amit Varma]: And competition, of course, is oxygen.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, that's where excellence inevitably comes from.
[Amit Varma]: And Joy just gave an example of that in the volleyball league, which he's doing and in
[Amit Varma]: the Kabaddi league.
[Amit Varma]: So is that the future vision of Indian sport in the sense that you have these federations,
[Amit Varma]: but they are autonomous, but they are bound by rules.
[Amit Varma]: And anybody, any entrepreneur can then go in and compete within that space.
[Amit Varma]: So tomorrow, someone like me can go and say, okay, I'm going to start a handball league
[Amit Varma]: or this league or that league.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I function within the rules of the game, but I can do whatever.
[Amit Varma]: So number one, is that your vision of Indian sport, say 20 years down the line, are we
[Amit Varma]: going to evolve in that direction?
[Amit Varma]: And the other sort of orthogonal question, which Joy might have a really good sense of
[Amit Varma]: having built the volleyball league, is that does it then become a question of building
[Amit Varma]: the popularity of a sport before it's necessarily commercially viable?
[Amit Varma]: Like if someone was to tell you 10 years ago, the natural assumption of someone like me
[Amit Varma]: would have been that there aren't viewers for the game.
[Amit Varma]: And then it becomes a chicken and egg problem.
[Amit Varma]: So our entrepreneurs then going in and saying that, you know, we'll just go first.
[Amit Varma]: And we'll put a good product out there and the viewership will come.
[Amit Varma]: Is that a model that you see working?
[Amit Varma]: And then therefore, would you say that many of these so called Olympic sports, which,
[Amit Varma]: you know, aren't necessarily super popular today?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, we watch Javelin once in four years.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this is the first time in my life, I saw a Javelin event, in fact, life.
[Amit Varma]: Can that change because of the efforts of entrepreneurs who go out there and build that
[Amit Varma]: market?
[Guest 1]: Excellent point, Amit.
[Guest 1]: And I think Joy's volleyball league is really going to be a precursor.
[Guest 1]: It's going to be interesting to see how the legal system responds to this.
[Guest 1]: So historically, most of these leagues have now gone out with private enterprise.
[Guest 1]: But they also always have had to take sanction from the federation.
[Guest 1]: And very often, that's just a payment.
[Guest 1]: It is supposed to be payment in lieu of regulatory services, which is essentially integrity services,
[Guest 1]: making sure that the rules are structured properly, sort of having some dispute resolution
[Guest 1]: structures.
[Guest 1]: But very often, it's just a check that is given in exchange for being allowed to do
[Guest 1]: the league.
[Guest 1]: What is going to happen with volleyball is it's a test case.
[Guest 1]: How is the sort of official pyramid of sport and if I may just take a moment to talk about
[Guest 1]: how the pyramid is structured, is every sort of federation has an international linkage.
[Guest 1]: So let's say it's the Volleyball Federation as an International Volleyball Federation
[Guest 1]: which recognizes the Indian one.
[Guest 1]: The Ministry of Sport also recognizes the Volleyball Federation and there have been
[Guest 1]: changes and the recognition recognition over time.
[Guest 1]: But then that recognition is dependent on that Volleyball Federation having state federations
[Guest 1]: as their members.
[Guest 1]: The state federations are expected to have district federations and you're supposed to
[Guest 1]: have literally national coverage to be this National Sports Federation and to comply with
[Guest 1]: certain norms.
[Guest 1]: Now the question is, is everything that you do, theoretically say within this pyramid,
[Guest 1]: is it truly a monopoly or monopsony or is the power that has been endowed simply a regulatory
[Guest 1]: power to essentially keep trusteeship of the rules of the game?
[Guest 1]: Because the essential function of this pyramid is that this pyramid is connected to the international
[Guest 1]: sports pyramid.
[Guest 1]: So that there has to be a coherence and universality to sport, right?
[Guest 1]: If volleyball in India was played differently from volleyball in Argentina versus Spain
[Guest 1]: versus Brazil, you couldn't have an international tournament because it's sort of disaggregated
[Guest 1]: pieces trying to feed to a common goal, right?
[Guest 1]: So there is a principle value and there is a natural monopoly element to this, which
[Guest 1]: is universality of rules and coherence in a sort of a trajectory moving upwards.
[Guest 1]: But that really comes up largely for the Olympic Games or multi-sport games.
[Guest 1]: What happens in between?
[Guest 1]: And is everything theoretically from a legal perspective under the pyramid?
[Guest 1]: The answer coming from the law is the answer is no.
[Guest 1]: There is a monopoly and it is not a monopsony.
[Guest 1]: There's a monopoly in creating the rules of the game, enforcing the rules of the game,
[Guest 1]: making sure there's no breach of like integrity, let me put it.
[Guest 1]: So someone's not destroying and diluting what the game looks like or the way it's played.
[Guest 1]: But beyond that, does it give you the right to run business?
[Guest 1]: That is a right that has been claimed, but it is not a right that theoretically could
[Guest 1]: be asserted under competition law.
[Guest 1]: And I mean, Indian competition law is new.
[Guest 1]: It's in a decade or two old.
[Guest 1]: We have a competition commission of India that has done some very interesting cases
[Guest 1]: on BCCM media rights, on Hockey India, there have been multiple federation type cases.
[Guest 1]: Very interesting one is on how it dealt with the Athletics Federation of India, which had
[Guest 1]: taken the view that every marathon in India had to be authorized by the Athletics Federation
[Unknown]: of India.
[Guest 1]: And the CCA actually held no, you do not have the right to prevent someone from holding
[Guest 1]: a marathon.
[Guest 1]: You can go and send athletes to international events, but your regulatory function and your
[Guest 1]: commercial function are separate.
[Guest 1]: You can charge a fee, anyone can pay that fee.
[Guest 1]: If it's a five lakhs, you'll measure the course, you'll make sure that health and safety is
[Guest 1]: taken care of and no sort of match fixing happening, etc.
[Guest 1]: But anyone should be able to go and charge, you can charge for it.
[Guest 1]: It's governance as a service.
[Guest 1]: But anyone can hold a marathon, just look at the way the running movement has evolved
[Guest 1]: as a result.
[Guest 1]: Right?
[Guest 1]: Imagine if you had to have Athletics Federation approved events all over the country, significant
[Guest 1]: intervention by competition commission.
[Guest 1]: And this is going to be a sort of a process of building businesses, building business
[Guest 1]: models.
[Guest 1]: But there before I hand over to Joy, I'd just like to say, we've been damaged a little bit
[Guest 1]: by the sort of the me too culture of sports leagues, where everyone is, we talked about
[Guest 1]: the 2008 movement moment of the IPL as much as Abhinav Bindra's.
[Guest 1]: That was adopted as a business model that could work everywhere.
[Guest 1]: And I have a problem with that because cricket and franchising made sense.
[Guest 1]: Because the prototype had already been developed, there was an audience, what you did is franchise
[Guest 1]: for growth.
[Guest 1]: But what every other league has tried to do, and I think you alluded to that a little bit
[Guest 1]: earlier is if that sport doesn't exist, can you build a solid franchise system, franchise
[Guest 1]: system is being used as startup capital, rather than expansion capital.
[Guest 1]: And I think they have to be new and innovative models, where you are not necessarily just
[Guest 1]: sort of outsourcing risk, and building unsustainable models, which break elsewhere as well.
[Guest 1]: And lots of our leagues have been very destructive to the sport, they're seen as very, very sort
[Guest 1]: of visionary and helpful, but very few have made it to their third year.
[Guest 1]: And once something does badly, it builds a mentality that this is not sustainable.
[Guest 1]: But it could simply be the business model that you've chosen the wrong way to go about
[Guest 1]: doing things.
[Guest 1]: And you've chosen the wrong people to do it with.
[Guest 1]: And I'll just give you an example, I think the IPL was fantastic, because of the ability
[Guest 1]: to reach new people democratize the tools of production, new selectors, you can market
[Guest 1]: in Kolkata differently from the way you market in Bangalore or Bombay.
[Guest 1]: But many of the other sports were not that they were saying, come and give me money for
[Guest 1]: three years, I'll take your money and I'll build a league.
[Guest 1]: I'll build from scratch, and I'll build an audience.
[Guest 1]: Now that's, that's not franchising, that is literally investing in something and taking
[Guest 1]: sort of outsourcing of risk, I would say.
[Guest 1]: On the other hand, you look at the BBL in Australia, who owns the BBL, Cricket Australia
[Guest 1]: owns the entire BBL, every single team within it, when it's ready and right, it will divest
[Guest 1]: because at that point, that sport needed sort of growth, needed sort of establishment.
[Guest 1]: And when the time is right, you can also bring in private capital.
[Guest 1]: And just just to end when I talked about earlier, the importance of governance to bring private
[Guest 1]: capital in.
[Guest 1]: At the same time, the importance of governance because private capital is going to come in.
[Guest 1]: All the more reason we are going to need that regulatory function of sports bodies to be
[Guest 1]: done excellently.
[Guest 1]: Because the profit motive is great, competition is great.
[Guest 1]: But private enterprise can also be destructive of the sports movement.
[Guest 1]: It leads to things like conflict of interest, the sort of the private sort of profiteering,
[Guest 1]: and you have someone in the body, also with an interest in that profiteering.
[Guest 1]: If you do not build a governance framework, private capital can damage as much as it can
[Guest 1]: support the growth of sport.
[Guest 2]: No, no, I have a lot to say, and a lot of which Nandan may have discussed over so many,
[Guest 2]: so many discussions.
[Guest 2]: But first and foremost, what happens is that one of the problems is firstly, when you start
[Guest 2]: a sport, you turn around and say, OK, this is an IPL, let's make a league, OK?
[Guest 2]: Let me give you some basic issues.
[Guest 2]: One is that every game is not good for a league, OK?
[Guest 2]: Individual sports, it's not easy to build a league in.
[Guest 2]: And I'll give you a typical case.
[Guest 2]: In the 70s, there was something called World Team Tennis in the United States of America.
[Guest 2]: John McEnroe was playing for Los Angeles, Jimmy Connors was playing for New York, Bjorn
[Guest 2]: Borg was playing for Washington.
[Guest 2]: It didn't work.
[Guest 2]: Why didn't it work?
[Guest 2]: Because people were watching Borg versus Connors or Borg versus McEnroe, Connors versus McEnroe.
[Guest 2]: They were never watching Washington versus New York or LA or any such contrived thing.
[Guest 2]: The problem is individual sport does not lend itself to leagues in the same way as team
[Guest 2]: sports do, number one.
[Guest 2]: Number two, there are some games which are more television-friendly, others less so.
[Guest 2]: Cricket is a great television-friendly game.
[Guest 2]: Hockey is not.
[Guest 2]: So you'll ask, the ball is equally small.
[Guest 2]: But remember, when you play cricket, you have 15 seconds of live action, OK?
[Guest 2]: Bowler goes in, bowls a ball, the batsman hits the ball.
[Guest 2]: And then you have a minute of replays.
[Guest 2]: Cricket is essentially a game of replays.
[Guest 2]: If you think about it, cricket is a game of four to five replays.
[Guest 2]: It's the ratio of live action to replays about one is to five, OK?
[Guest 2]: Hockey is exactly the opposite.
[Guest 2]: You barely have time to show a replay because the action is so fast.
[Guest 2]: Maybe you'll get in the replay of a penalty corner or two, but during a football game
[Guest 2]: or a hockey game, it's very difficult to get in replays.
[Guest 2]: Now here, football, the ball is large enough.
[Guest 2]: You can follow the action.
[Guest 2]: So football, volleyball, basketball, easy games to create.
[Guest 2]: The second thing is, do games have breaks?
[Guest 2]: So football is, in fact, one of the tougher games because you don't have that many breaks
[Guest 2]: to put in ads, whereas cricket is terrific for ads because in every over, you have a
[Guest 2]: chance to put in ads.
[Guest 2]: So all these are factors that come into, A, whether you can make your sport viable or
[Guest 2]: not.
[Guest 2]: Is it an individual sport?
[Guest 2]: Is it television friendly?
[Guest 2]: For example, I love playing table tennis.
[Guest 2]: I actually played at a fairly decent level in college as well.
[Guest 2]: But table tennis is not a sport I can watch.
[Guest 2]: I watch tennis, which I've never played in my life.
[Guest 2]: But table tennis is not a sport I can watch simply because the mechanics of the game and
[Guest 2]: how it looks on the tables.
[Guest 2]: So those are things that you need to look at.
[Guest 2]: So everything cannot be a league.
[Guest 2]: Secondly, a lot of things are suited by just a tournament.
[Guest 2]: What you call a league can just be a terrific tournament, and you can make it.
[Guest 2]: And that's what it used to be.
[Guest 2]: So you didn't have an Indian soccer league before, but you used to have the Durant Cup,
[Guest 2]: the Borderline Cup, the DCM Cup.
[Guest 2]: You had the Rovers Cup.
[Guest 2]: So Bombay had the Rovers, DCM in Delhi.
[Guest 2]: The Durant used to happen all over the place, mostly in Delhi.
[Guest 2]: The IFA Shield used to happen in Calcutta.
[Guest 2]: That's how it used to operate.
[Guest 2]: So a good tournament also makes sense because you're attracting teams, you're attracting
[Guest 2]: people out there.
[Guest 2]: And some cases, you look at a sport and you say, you know what, this needs a tournament.
[Guest 2]: This doesn't need a league because everything does not need to be an IPL.
[Guest 2]: The next thing is, how do I actually benchmark the price of the players?
[Guest 2]: And this is the biggest problem.
[Guest 2]: If I turn on benchmark and say that, you know what, if an IPL player gets $100,000, the
[Guest 2]: average IPL player gets $100,000, my league players need to get $25,000, that's totally
[Guest 2]: the wrong way to look at it.
[Guest 2]: Because is your league going to generate that cash?
[Guest 2]: If not now in three years' time?
[Guest 2]: If it's not, pay them the amount of money you think they'll generate in three years'
[Unknown]: time.
[Guest 2]: Because otherwise, your league will never have a path to profitability.
[Guest 2]: And that's a big, big, big issue with a lot of leagues.
[Guest 2]: I mean, badminton, the kind of money the players are being paid, I'm looking at it and saying,
[Guest 2]: can they sustain this league?
[Guest 2]: It turns out they can't.
[Guest 2]: We don't have a badminton league anymore.
[Guest 2]: Let's be very honest.
[Guest 2]: At this point in time, we're talking about Indian sport and all that, we're Congo.
[Guest 2]: There's an Indian Premier League, there's an ISL, there's I-League, which is also football,
[Guest 2]: there's Kabaddi.
[Guest 2]: There may be volleyball, which we're doing at the end of the year.
[Guest 2]: Name one other league which is extinct.
[Guest 2]: There isn't.
[Guest 2]: And that's a fact of it.
[Guest 2]: Wrestling has gone under.
[Guest 2]: Badminton has gone under.
[Guest 2]: Handball has not started.
[Guest 2]: Coco, we think will start, nobody knows whether it'll ever start or not.
[Guest 2]: Hockey has gone under.
[Guest 2]: And that's a fact.
[Guest 2]: Because all of these are over-promised, under-delivered.
[Guest 2]: And OK, the single most important thing when you're looking for a league is the ownership.
[Guest 2]: So if you have a guy who's the owner, who's turning around and said, boss, you mean Abhishek
[Guest 2]: Bachchan has a team and I'm going to sit beside him when the picture is taken, he's going
[Guest 2]: to be there for one or two years till the novelty of sitting beside Abhishek Bachchan
[Guest 2]: makes sense.
[Guest 2]: After that, three or four crores he's losing, it no longer makes sense.
[Guest 2]: So these are all the barriers that, practical barriers that come into trying to make a league.
[Guest 2]: And why a lot of our leagues have gone bottoms up, primarily because a lot of these things
[Guest 2]: probably didn't deserve to be leagues in the first place.
[Guest 2]: And leagues jumped simply because it was easy to explain to people that the IPL model, oh,
[Guest 2]: like the IPL, we have our league.
[Guest 2]: So that's one of the things and lessons we've got to learn in Indian sport to say, OK, what
[Guest 2]: is it that we make a league?
[Guest 2]: What is it that we make a tournament?
[Guest 2]: What is it that's best served by doing something completely else?
[Guest 2]: And all these are, mind you, I believe that even in archery, you can have an activity
[Guest 2]: which is financially rewarding, makes sense to athletes, and works.
[Guest 2]: But you have to create that framework based on where the game is and what you can get
[Guest 2]: out of it.
[Guest 2]: And that's what we're not doing nowadays very well.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, all great points.
[Amit Varma]: I'm learning so much during this conversation.
[Amit Varma]: Just to give my thoughts on some of the points.
[Amit Varma]: One, I take your point, Nandan, that these are not necessarily monopsonies, though, you
[Amit Varma]: know, one thinks of it as a monopsony because when the BCCI shut down the ICL, essentially
[Amit Varma]: by threatening the players who played it that you can't play for your countries again, there
[Amit Varma]: were effectively behaving as a monopsony and they had the market power to do so because
[Amit Varma]: they had a monopoly over the sport.
[Amit Varma]: So it worked that way.
[Amit Varma]: And I would go further by saying that, yeah, I buy your point that they're not monopsonies
[Amit Varma]: necessarily, they're not even necessarily monopolies in terms of setting the rules.
[Amit Varma]: That's the way it's been normalized.
[Amit Varma]: We think of it like that.
[Amit Varma]: But if you look at what happens to new sports, for example, recently, I went into this rabbit
[Amit Varma]: hole where I was watching a lot of Tetris World Championships and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And there are sort of different federations which have different kinds of World Championships.
[Amit Varma]: One is the newest kind of Tetris, which is very funky and colorful and sound effects
[Amit Varma]: and all that.
[Amit Varma]: The other is a classic console Tetris, where I think recently the previous champion 17
[Amit Varma]: year old Joseph Saley lost to the 13 year old new champion whose name is Dog.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, he calls himself Dog and all these are happening online.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, something new like poker, like I recently represented India in a particular
[Amit Varma]: form of poker called match poker, we won the Asian Championships.
[Amit Varma]: And it's not like there is one federation, the federation which created this kind of
[Amit Varma]: poker was something called the International Federation of Match Poker and match poker
[Amit Varma]: is not poker, which is why I kind of came out of I was a poker player for five years
[Amit Varma]: retired, wasn't for me, the lifestyle wasn't worth it, even though the money was recent.
[Amit Varma]: But I came out of this because I thought, oh, new format, let me optimize for it.
[Amit Varma]: And we won the Indian version of the IPL a couple of times.
[Amit Varma]: And then we played this.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is, you have multiple competing leagues, and you have multiple systems of
[Amit Varma]: rules.
[Amit Varma]: So not just multiple forms of the game, like No Limit Hold'em or Pot Limit Omaha, but you
[Amit Varma]: also have different sort of rules of the game like this match poker looks like Hold'em,
[Amit Varma]: but it's like, not like it at all, all the imperatives are completely different.
[Amit Varma]: So that sort of shines a light that there are possibilities that even when it comes
[Amit Varma]: to setting the rules, you can possibly go beyond maybe not in some legacy sports, because
[Amit Varma]: everything is so incredibly ossified and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But maybe there's way past that and at least thank God there's no, you know, a federation
[Amit Varma]: of podcasting, for example, run by the Indian government, because then you know, the seen
[Amit Varma]: and the unseen simply would not exist.
[Amit Varma]: As far as Joy, what you said about all these, both of you mentioned how these different
[Amit Varma]: people are trying different things, and they don't make any sense.
[Amit Varma]: And I completely agree with that as well.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I think what happened was the IPL gets successful, all these copycat guys come
[Amit Varma]: similar to you know, Uber become successful of 50 copycat Ubers come up and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And I think you also have to look at what a sport is at the grassroots, like somebody
[Amit Varma]: said to me last year that hey, why shouldn't the IPL become eventually a system like the
[Amit Varma]: English Premier League, where you have different leagues, you have the championship, league
[Amit Varma]: one and you have relegations and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And I said, Listen, that's not possible.
[Amit Varma]: That's not possible because the ecosystem doesn't exist.
[Amit Varma]: In England, you have all of these, this rich ecosystem of so many football clubs who've
[Amit Varma]: been playing for over a century, and you actually have that sort of structured way and all those
[Amit Varma]: hundreds of clubs.
[Amit Varma]: In India, you simply don't the IPL was an artificial creation.
[Amit Varma]: It worked because there was a craze for the game.
[Amit Varma]: But if you want to kind of take it deeper, I'm not sure it would really work in that
[Amit Varma]: sense.
[Amit Varma]: But all these are sort of rambles.
[Amit Varma]: And we've spoken about a lot of big meta level questions in this first part of the podcast.
[Amit Varma]: After we come back from the commercial break we are about to take, I actually want to get
[Amit Varma]: down and dirty and talk about Indian sport per se, how it has evolved, what you guys
[Amit Varma]: have done, what your experiences are, and where it's going and we get down to specifics.
[Amit Varma]: I'm also very intrigued in some of the things you were saying Nandan about, you know, fencing,
[Amit Varma]: how it suddenly came of age or, you know, how the Hockey Federation pulled itself together.
[Amit Varma]: So all of that after a quick break.
[Amit Varma]: On the scene and the unseen, I often speak about positive some games.
[Amit Varma]: Well, if you want to be surrounded by beauty, and you love fine art, I have a win win proposition
[Amit Varma]: for you.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to Indian colours.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colours licenses images of fine art from some of the best contemporary artists
[Amit Varma]: in India and adapts them to objects of everyday use like tote bags, pouches and home decor
[Amit Varma]: items.
[Amit Varma]: You get to surround yourself with the finest modern Indian art at affordable prices and
[Amit Varma]: artists get royalties for every product you buy.
[Amit Varma]: Win win game.
[Amit Varma]: The Indian Colours new range is in and includes elegant yet comfortable dresses for women
[Amit Varma]: and casual shirts for men with standout motifs by artists such as Tanmoy Samanta, Manisha
[Amit Varma]: Ghera Baswari, Shruti Nelson, Pradeep Mishra and Jaideep Mehrotra.
[Amit Varma]: Stay home, but dress smart.
[Amit Varma]: And if you're missing your friends in these lockdown days, worry not.
[Amit Varma]: You can show them you're thinking of them by buying gifts for them from Indian Colours.
[Amit Varma]: Corporate gifting is also available.
[Amit Varma]: So head on over to Indian Colours.com, that's Colours with an OU and make art a part of
[Amit Varma]: your life.
[Amit Varma]: And hey, for a 15% discount, use the code UNSEEN.
[Amit Varma]: That's right.
[Amit Varma]: UNSEEN for 15% off at IndianColours.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Joy Bhattacharya and Nandan Kamath, both of whom have done so much amazing
[Amit Varma]: work within Indian sport and have such great insights on what is happening in Indian sport.
[Amit Varma]: You know, let's now begin talking about Indian sport.
[Amit Varma]: But specifically for a moment, let's first talk about the history of Indian sport.
[Amit Varma]: We've already discussed about how we weren't a sporting nation for a large period of time.
[Amit Varma]: And there are many reasons one can speculate upon that poverty being one we didn't mention
[Amit Varma]: because you know, hey, who's got the leisure time to actually play sport.
[Amit Varma]: But looking back on it, it seems that a lot of the sports that we became good at our essentially
[Amit Varma]: a colonial bequest, like whether it's cricket or badminton, or we had world champions in
[Amit Varma]: like billiards and all at one particular point in time, I remember when I was growing up,
[Amit Varma]: it would seem that these were colonial bequests, which could essentially be played by the anglicized
[Amit Varma]: elites.
[Amit Varma]: And then gradually that started changing.
[Amit Varma]: And now of course, the landscape is very different.
[Amit Varma]: One narrative, of course, is that liberalization opened it up and there was this burgeoning
[Amit Varma]: middle class.
[Amit Varma]: So you had all your cricket stars, you know, coming out of smaller towns, like Dhoni and
[Amit Varma]: Sehwag and whatever instead of from specific places like I did an episode with the historian
[Amit Varma]: Ram Goha, where he was speaking about his time in the Hindu college in Delhi in the
[Amit Varma]: early 70s.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems the other Indian cricket team was from his college only, you know, so you
[Amit Varma]: had a very small pool of elite anglicized elite people from whom you are drawing all
[Amit Varma]: of your talent and that kind of change.
[Amit Varma]: So take me through a bit of Indian sporting history, did we have a sporting history before
[Amit Varma]: colonialism?
[Amit Varma]: Or I mean, do we know anything about that?
[Amit Varma]: How has sport in India evolved through the decades after independence?
[Amit Varma]: And perhaps after liberalization?
[Amit Varma]: What do you think are the kind of key moments?
[Amit Varma]: Give me a sense of that direction and that drift.
[Guest 2]: Okay, I'll just go first, because I used to do this professionally, for I take classes
[Guest 2]: in IIM Calcutta and MICA.
[Guest 2]: So this is one of the things that you know, not classes, guest lectures, but this is one
[Guest 2]: of the things that I always wanted to do, because, see, the one question all of us come
[Guest 2]: and, you know, all of us have heard this over the last 30 years is that if India has 1 billion
[Guest 2]: people, why don't we win more medals?
[Guest 2]: The only way the question hasn't changed is from 1 billion, we've gone to 1.3 billion
[Guest 2]: and the question has remained the same.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I hope, you know, in the last five years, the question has changed a little bit
[Guest 2]: thanks to this kind of stuff that Nandan and his team are doing.
[Guest 2]: But see, if you look at it, I mean, forget about, you know, Pachisi and, you know, all
[Guest 2]: the ancient Indian sports, Koko, Pachisi, Koko was apparently played with chariots and
[Guest 2]: all that.
[Guest 2]: And there's a lot of history.
[Guest 2]: But really, Indian sport, as we know, it started with the Brits.
[Guest 2]: And they just thought that it's a better idea that we sort of throw javelins and, you know,
[Guest 2]: kick footballs and hockey sticks, use hockey sticks rather than, you know, basically go
[Guest 2]: to war.
[Guest 2]: And if you look at it very carefully, you will see that almost every sport, the first
[Guest 2]: tournament is in the UK, because Brits are very good at, not so good at playing a sport
[Guest 2]: created in vending sports.
[Guest 2]: So the first tournament is in the UK.
[Guest 2]: And the second tournament is in India.
[Guest 2]: So the first golf course in the world is, of course, the St. Andrews Golf Course in
[Guest 2]: Scotland.
[Guest 2]: The next one is the RCJC, which is the Royal Calcutta Golf Club in Calcutta.
[Guest 2]: The first, you know, major tournament, international football tournament is the FA Cup.
[Guest 2]: The second is the Durand Cup, which is in India, which is originally played in Shimla.
[Guest 2]: So for them, the colonial legacy is a great thing.
[Guest 2]: You keep your, you know, you keep your Brits in India happy.
[Guest 2]: You keep your soldiers happy.
[Guest 2]: You keep even the local populace happy, because you know what, I'd rather be beaten in a football
[Guest 2]: game in 1911 by Mohun Bagan and for people to celebrate, rather than have Bengalis irate
[Guest 2]: Bengalis throw bombs at me.
[Guest 2]: And that's the difference.
[Guest 2]: So the Brits did a very good job of it, which also meant that the sports that they were
[Guest 2]: interested in were the sports that we really inherited, which is really lots of football,
[Guest 2]: some amount of cricket, some amount of hockey, that's what we inherited.
[Guest 2]: And they started putting together tournaments.
[Guest 2]: So they had this whole tournaments of, you know, the pentangular, where, you know, it's
[Guest 2]: a costly thought today, but you know, you're playing against religions, you know, Europeans
[Guest 2]: playing against Parsis, playing against Hindus, playing against Muslims, playing against others,
[Guest 2]: which is, you know, all other religions which are there and, you know, for example, Vijay
[Guest 2]: Hazare is an Indian Christian, so he plays for others because he can't play for Europeans.
[Guest 2]: And all these things happen.
[Guest 2]: But basically what happens is the British are running sport in India.
[Guest 2]: Now the big story is what happens in 1947.
[Guest 2]: So 47 happens, the Brits leave India.
[Guest 2]: Now you can understand the Brits have, you know, depleted our treasury and all our reserves
[Guest 2]: over 200 years.
[Guest 2]: You know, they've had a lot of time, 190 odd years, 1757 to 1947 to do what they do.
[Guest 2]: Who is left who has the money and time to do anything other than roti kapra makhan,
[Guest 2]: which is what the country is looking to do because, you know, we are a very poor nation
[Guest 2]: struggling to, you know, get up.
[Guest 2]: The only people who had the time were the Maharajas and the Rajas.
[Guest 2]: So if you look around at that time, you know, half hour trophies, whether it's a Durand,
[Guest 2]: whether it's, you know, the Patiala, the Ranji trophy, which is presented with the Maharaja
[Guest 2]: Patiala, all these are dominated by the Maharajas because they are the only people who have
[Guest 2]: the time and the leisure to do this stuff.
[Guest 2]: In fact, if you look at it, we shot for a long time, you know, Karni Singh and all these
[Guest 2]: guys shot for a long time, we did well at Polar because, hell, these are games at Maharajas.
[Guest 2]: So 1956, we win the World Polar Tournament because, you know, Maharajas do well at that.
[Guest 2]: We do well at Billiards because, you know, these are the kind of games the Brits play.
[Guest 2]: So for a long time, this happened and then, you know, 60s, 70s, you're bureaucrats and
[Guest 2]: everyone's coming in, then what happens?
[Guest 2]: Then is the next step where Privy Purse happens.
[Guest 2]: And once the Privy Purse happens, immediately these guys don't no longer have the money.
[Guest 2]: Look, this is a very, you know, broad stroke narrative.
[Guest 2]: Secondly, the Indian bureaucracy is also saying that, you know, we want the power.
[Guest 2]: And remember, in the 70s, possibly the kind of money you would get for, for example, going
[Guest 2]: abroad is $20, $20 is what you used to get it for an exchange.
[Guest 2]: So going for a foreign trip abroad was a huge thing.
[Guest 2]: So the next people who took over this thing were the politicians and the bureaucrats.
[Guest 2]: Because hey, sport was a way we could send relatives abroad, where you could go abroad,
[Guest 2]: where you could pet people, and a lot of them.
[Guest 2]: I'm not saying they were not good people who were there, but a lot of these places, if
[Guest 2]: you see the Indian sporting establishment, the bureaucracy started dominating it.
[Guest 2]: And if you see, you know, people like Vijay Kumar Malhotra, you know, Vijay Kumar Malhotra
[Guest 2]: joined the Indian, you know, Archery Federation in the 70s when Mrs. Gandhi was in power.
[Guest 2]: And, you know, cut to 2018 and her grandson is, you know, competing for a place and, you
[Guest 2]: know, trying to, you know, establish his political position.
[Guest 2]: And he was still in power.
[Guest 2]: I mean, he just he was there for the next 47, 48 years.
[Guest 2]: And that's, that's true of so many Indian sports.
[Guest 2]: I mean, and this is cuts across party lines, you know, whether I want to talk about Jagdish
[Guest 2]: Title or Sajjan Kumar, all these people, federations were a way of keeping relatives happy of going
[Guest 2]: for foreign visits and of doing all that.
[Guest 2]: And I have to say that the really professional Indian managers, sports manager, really is
[Guest 2]: a product of 2005, 6, 7, 8, you know, up to and including that first IPL.
[Guest 2]: People like Nandan, people like even a Sundar Raman, you know, entering Indian sport and
[Guest 2]: saying, OK, we're going to look at it professionally.
[Guest 2]: So there have been places before, but I think those, those were inflection points, 2008,
[Guest 2]: the Privy Purse, independence before that, you know, that's, that's basically how I look
[Guest 2]: at it.
[Guest 2]: So this is my broad, broad stroke.
[Guest 2]: I know Nandan will know far more detail and give you a far better idea.
[Guest 2]: But broadly, these are the ways, you know, you can divide it up.
[Guest 1]: No, I think that was excellently put.
[Guest 1]: I just found a little bit of interest in some of the reading I've done around early stage
[Guest 1]: cricket.
[Guest 1]: And for that matter, many of these other sports, I know it's a term quite used quite differently
[Guest 1]: now, but the concept of social distancing was quite popular at the time.
[Guest 1]: And sport was seen as a way of socially distancing yourself from sort of the plebeians to show
[Guest 1]: that you were anglicized and sort of with it and cool for the time.
[Guest 1]: So a lot of the sports are around that and then that whole notion of privilege and sport.
[Guest 1]: And obviously, so much of our infrastructure, even today, in many of these sports like golf,
[Guest 1]: are actually locked up behind members clubs.
[Guest 1]: There aren't public golf courses in India.
[Guest 1]: So, so much of that is still sort of privilege based access to even playing the sport, forget
[Guest 1]: about progressing at the sport.
[Guest 1]: And there is very much a sort of a class system, which is not fully dissipated.
[Guest 1]: I think one of the great joys and successes is to see even the Indian cricket team and
[Guest 1]: how it has got democratized and you call it the Dhoni effect, you call it whatever else.
[Guest 1]: But today, I think anyone who's good has a way in, there are various reasons for that.
[Guest 1]: But you also see a lot of other sports and one of the things that becomes very clear
[Guest 1]: is it's sport is not just about this sort of actualization and self-actualization.
[Guest 1]: But for many, many of our athletes, it is a simply a matter of livelihood.
[Guest 1]: Solution to that has been sort of it moved from patronage and needing patronage of the
[Guest 1]: Rajas.
[Guest 1]: I mean, early Olympic movement was supported by the Tatas, just sort of collecting money
[Guest 1]: together.
[Guest 1]: Lots of things have happened.
[Guest 1]: But when we went to sort of independent India, we used a slightly different model.
[Guest 1]: So if you look at the big models of the world, you look at the US, it's college sport that
[Guest 1]: drives sort of really top class sport.
[Guest 1]: And actually, I was amazed with a couple of things in just my personal journey.
[Guest 1]: So I went to the UK, I went to Oxford as a graduate student.
[Guest 1]: So I'd finished at a national law school, I'd played a pretty high level of cricket
[Guest 1]: in India.
[Guest 1]: When I go and turn up at my college, there are 39 colleges at Oxford, every single one
[Guest 1]: of them had either equal or better facilities than I had used as a state level cricketer.
[Guest 1]: So state level cricketers, we got four or five games on turf, all the rest was on matting.
[Guest 1]: We barely got to play in the nets, maybe a few days before the tournament, pretty sort
[Guest 1]: of decrepit.
[Guest 1]: I played that level of cricket, I'd never had a physio to work with, what sort of physical
[Guest 1]: training involved is okay, the nets are starting in sort of 20 minutes, run 10 rounds of Chinnaswamy
[Guest 1]: Stadium and that's your warm up.
[Guest 1]: Few stretches seemed like a big deal.
[Guest 1]: I mean, you talk to some of the Indian cricketers who played in the early 2000s, they did not
[Guest 1]: have a legitimate physiotherapist.
[Guest 1]: Like anything happened, what you would get is a doctor popping crocin for you.
[Guest 1]: Whatever happened, muscle pain, injury, muscle pull, to the crocin was only sort of the Andrew
[Guest 1]: Lepus and others who come in and change sports science in some ways.
[Guest 1]: But what I'm getting back to is sort of that notion of access to infrastructure.
[Guest 1]: If a college and 39 colleges have the equivalent of what maybe 35 states have in India, and
[Guest 1]: that's in one little town.
[Guest 1]: And then you go to the US and you look at college sport, and the craziness of college
[Guest 1]: sport and NCAA football.
[Guest 1]: And it's only recently, in fact, in the last few months, that that amateurism has been
[Guest 1]: sort of diluted sort of athletes in the US today cannot be paid zero while college programs
[Guest 1]: make millions and millions and coaches make millions.
[Guest 1]: There's a recent case on name, image and likeness and the right to be paid for that.
[Guest 1]: But they still built an entire culture around an identity which was not necessarily national.
[Guest 1]: It was parochial.
[Guest 1]: And I think Ram Guha talks about a lot about this of needing to be parochial for sport.
[Guest 1]: But you can find your own parochial isms.
[Guest 1]: And the US founded through colleges, Europe founded through clubs.
[Guest 1]: So there's a massive club system.
[Guest 1]: I mean, you look again at Holland, I think, Amsterdam has more hockey pitches, or at least
[Guest 1]: had more hockey pitches than all of India did.
[Guest 1]: All of them run by clubs.
[Guest 1]: What did we do?
[Guest 1]: We are, again, very state driven.
[Guest 1]: What we did is we made sure that every decent athlete got a government job.
[Guest 1]: So there was actually a mandate that the public sector units, many of them have surpluses,
[Guest 1]: they were forced to employ our athletes that had an element of security.
[Guest 1]: And like I've said in sort of my piece earlier, and you talked about intermediate rewards,
[Guest 1]: but it's also where lots of ambitions went to die.
[Guest 1]: So it was the terminal result and reward that people wanted a government job was secure.
[Guest 1]: That's where your sort of aspiration ended, because that was seen as the end goal.
[Guest 1]: So for many years, we ran on sort of the public sector support.
[Guest 1]: I mean, private sector was nowhere, right?
[Guest 1]: And it's only in these 2000s that the IPL comes in.
[Guest 1]: I sort of have my journey, go and study the UK and the US.
[Guest 1]: I worked for three years at a law firm, I come back to India wanting to do something
[Guest 1]: meaningful with my skills.
[Guest 1]: I'm a lawyer, but deeply interested in sport.
[Guest 1]: And I go around talking to people, people I've played with other people doing great
[Guest 1]: things in sport.
[Guest 1]: And when I asked them, which lawyer do you use, they just give me this quizzical look,
[Guest 1]: what do you mean, lawyer?
[Guest 1]: Right?
[Guest 1]: No, never dealt with a lawyer in and that that's the professionalism that Joy talks
[Guest 1]: about as well.
[Guest 1]: And to me, for me, the game changed in 2008.
[Guest 1]: When IMG comes in to the IPL, contracts, sponsorship contracts, franchise agreement, that that
[Guest 1]: IPL franchise agreement has been copied, I think, 25 different times, and I keep joking
[Guest 1]: with the IMG lawyers who I know quite well, you have lawyered for all of Indian sport
[Guest 1]: with that one contract, they've been massacred, but but they still have some of the words
[Guest 1]: I've seen some of the other leagues where the word IPL still still appears in the contract.
[Guest 1]: But what you saw there was a gradual professionalization and then a sudden professionalization.
[Guest 1]: So nothing happened for many years.
[Guest 1]: But 2008, you suddenly started seeing many, many more people coming in, even if only seasonally
[Guest 1]: to sport.
[Guest 1]: So you had many doers, very few heads and very few people thinking sport.
[Guest 1]: But suddenly you saw that because the money attracted enough professionals to sport.
[Guest 1]: And then you had the IPL for three months.
[Guest 1]: But then the other people had another nine months to do something else with.
[Guest 1]: So a lot of the people who started the other leagues were the product of the IPL, they'd
[Guest 1]: work within a franchise.
[Guest 1]: It's not a 12 month league, you have other things to do, your mind is active, you start
[Guest 1]: doing other things.
[Guest 1]: And to me, that's where a lot of the sort of democratization, not just from structure,
[Guest 1]: but just from the market started playing out.
[Guest 1]: People brought physios in, people brought foreign coaches in, Indian coaches got to work very
[Guest 1]: closely.
[Guest 1]: But most importantly of all, I think that divide between foreigner and Indian in the
[Guest 1]: players minds dissipated and disappeared.
[Guest 1]: Cricket gets a lot of flack for what it does for other sports.
[Guest 1]: You don't hear that language anymore.
[Guest 1]: I think people appreciate what Indian cricket has done for other sports in many ways.
[Guest 1]: So that world is flat.
[Guest 1]: I mean, you watch the sort of performance of India and in Australia.
[Guest 1]: That was a transformative series, not just for cricket, but for Indian sport.
[Guest 1]: Are you telling me the Indian girls who played that quarterfinal against Australia wouldn't
[Guest 1]: have had that in their minds?
[Guest 1]: Absolutely, yes.
[Guest 1]: So many battles are not fought by the necessarily the same athletes.
[Guest 1]: But the battles of breaking down competition, believing what is possible is a sort of a
[Guest 1]: nationwide team.
[Guest 1]: It's not broken by sport.
[Guest 1]: And Abhinav Bindra in shooting, you couldn't have a more different sport than than Chavelin.
[Guest 1]: And still you see Neeraj Chopra sort of attributing some element of his mindset and his mind game
[Guest 1]: to the fact that Abhinav Bindra went 13 years before.
[Amit Varma]: So my next question comes out of sort of an aside that sprung to my mind where you spoke
[Amit Varma]: about the lack of infrastructure.
[Amit Varma]: Like I'm just thinking of chess, for example, when Anand was coming up in the late 80s as
[Amit Varma]: a really promising young adolescent and then young teenage player.
[Amit Varma]: He obviously ran into the Soviet system and the Soviet system had incredible pedagogy.
[Amit Varma]: Like there is this story about how, you know, Anand would be figuring out things over the
[Amit Varma]: board concretely calculating and all that at the age of 17 or 18.
[Amit Varma]: And all of those heuristics had been taught to, you know, his Soviet opponents when they
[Amit Varma]: were like eight years old or nine years old.
[Amit Varma]: So it was second nature to them.
[Amit Varma]: And it wasn't second nature to him.
[Amit Varma]: And he had to battle that.
[Amit Varma]: And that is such an enormous achievement getting to the top despite that I often speak about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what Anand did was really equal to winning a Formula One race in a Maruti
[Amit Varma]: 800.
[Amit Varma]: That's effectively what he did when you consider the infrastructural disadvantages.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what you see in modern times is that that's leveled out because of the internet
[Amit Varma]: and because of this incredibly powerful pedagogical software in the sense that for the last 15
[Amit Varma]: years or so computers have been much better than humans and they play a huge role in pedagogy
[Amit Varma]: where, you know, people can play hundreds of thousands of games in a year and just learn
[Amit Varma]: so much use computers for analysis.
[Amit Varma]: And that's kind of changed everything.
[Amit Varma]: So now here is a big question that comes up about chess.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll tell you why I bring it up and in the context of other sports, which is that
[Amit Varma]: on the one hand, it's true that Anand becoming successful led to a chess boom in India, like
[Amit Varma]: after him.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, there was a gap about who the next grandmaster would be.
[Amit Varma]: It was like Thipsey versus Barua.
[Amit Varma]: And that was the thing.
[Amit Varma]: And eventually they both got there.
[Amit Varma]: And today they're like a dime a dozen.
[Amit Varma]: I think last year, the squares on a chess board were covered.
[Amit Varma]: We reached 64 and then we crossed 64 and they're a dime a dozen.
[Amit Varma]: So on the one hand, there can be a narrative that Anand led to a chess boom, which is definitely
[Amit Varma]: true to some extent.
[Amit Varma]: On the other hand, there is a narrative that it's this democratization of technology and
[Amit Varma]: pedagogy and infrastructure, as it were, which led to that chess boom and Anand to some extent,
[Amit Varma]: but also this.
[Amit Varma]: Now, this leads me to think about what historians call the great man theory of history, where
[Amit Varma]: there are these severe disagreements between people about whether history is shaped by
[Amit Varma]: great men or occasionally women.
[Amit Varma]: But we know how sexist history has generally been in these matters, that you only have
[Amit Varma]: great men, but is shaped by great men.
[Amit Varma]: And there's another view that says that there are certain tides and processes to history,
[Amit Varma]: and we shouldn't ascribe too much credit to individuals.
[Amit Varma]: Now, when I think on Indian sport, it seems to me that there are many inflection points,
[Amit Varma]: which tie into the great man theory or the great moment theory, like for Indian cricket,
[Amit Varma]: you can say 1983 made a big difference, you know, or you could say the IPL made a big
[Amit Varma]: difference.
[Amit Varma]: And I do believe both of those certainly made a difference.
[Amit Varma]: For the great man theory, you spoke about, you know, how Bindra's gold medal made a great
[Amit Varma]: difference in terms of self belief and the perceptions that people had towards the sport.
[Amit Varma]: Equally, you know, you can look at Gopichand.
[Amit Varma]: If Gopichand did not exist, would badminton be where it is today?
[Amit Varma]: And I think there's an argument there to be made that no, perhaps it would not.
[Amit Varma]: Even with say, why do so many of our women wrestlers from Haryana do well, and that has
[Amit Varma]: to do with the happenstance of you know, in the late 70s, great coach Chandigarh, who
[Amit Varma]: doesn't have any sons, gets the news that the Olympics is now going to open up wrestling
[Amit Varma]: to women.
[Amit Varma]: So he trains his daughters and one of his assistant coaches is Mahavir Singh Phogat.
[Amit Varma]: And he does the same thing.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, and that ecosystem suddenly comes up.
[Amit Varma]: So what is sort of your take on this on the importance of these sort of inflection points?
[Amit Varma]: And would it be the case that Indian sport is now reaching a stage of maturity, where
[Amit Varma]: we don't need these anymore, where we are progressing along a certain route, we will
[Amit Varma]: get there.
[Amit Varma]: You know, we are not reliant on individual inspirational figures or individual people
[Amit Varma]: like Gopichand to set up something, but that there is a broader movement that has now begun
[Amit Varma]: and that has a momentum of its own.
[Guest 2]: Here's my take on it.
[Guest 2]: And I'm, again, as I said, all this is very much a matter of debate.
[Guest 2]: I feel that sport, more than anything else, requires heroes.
[Guest 2]: It requires heroes and heroines.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I use it in a completely non-sexual sense, more than anything else, because the
[Guest 2]: inspirational factor cannot come there.
[Guest 2]: And I'll take an example, which is not mentioned by any of you, which is to do with football.
[Guest 2]: I mean, Northeast football, OK, you have Tao, who is 1948.
[Guest 2]: He's the captain of the 1948 Olympic team, very respected man, plays in Calcutta football.
[Guest 2]: You have a couple of people in the 80s, Pem Dorji plays in the 80s.
[Guest 2]: But it's Baichung Bhutia who opens the tap to the Northeast.
[Guest 2]: And I'll take you through that.
[Guest 2]: If you look at 93, 94, Baichung Bhutia comes, starts playing for East Bengal, starts playing
[Guest 2]: soccer, and suddenly the entire Northeast is open.
[Guest 2]: And then within the next 7, 8, 10 years, you'll find the teams dominated, men's teams, women's
[Guest 2]: teams dominated by the Northeast.
[Guest 2]: And I think because sport is all about dreaming, I feel individuals play a far bigger factor
[Guest 2]: than they do normally.
[Guest 2]: It's easy for you to turn around and say that if it hadn't been Abhinav Bindra, somebody
[Guest 2]: else would have done it.
[Guest 2]: I don't believe that's necessarily true.
[Guest 2]: The unique set of circumstances that made Abhinav Bindra a champion are probably difficult
[Guest 2]: to replicate, because he were two, three things.
[Guest 2]: He had the money, he had the means, but he also had that complete perfectionist phase.
[Guest 2]: I mean, think about a fact about thinking about that I'm going to play in an auditorium,
[Guest 2]: which is very large.
[Guest 2]: So instead of shooting in my shooting gallery, which is small, I need to shoot in a large
[Guest 2]: place just to get used to that hall I'll be in Beijing.
[Guest 2]: That's the kind of detailing that an insane guy does.
[Guest 2]: And I'm sorry that it's easy to turn around and say that history will, somebody else like
[Guest 2]: Abhinav Bindra would have turned up, but the odds are against it.
[Guest 2]: And that's why, again, you look at history, you look at 1983.
[Guest 2]: Had India not won in 83, would the cricket have been the same?
[Guest 2]: Well, I can tell you one thing, you know, for all recorded history there is, we certainly
[Guest 2]: wouldn't have bid for a World Cup in 1987.
[Guest 2]: Had we not won in 83, all of them were planning, they thought they'd lose, and they were going
[Guest 2]: for a holiday to the US after that.
[Guest 2]: Had that happened, would the 1987 World Cup happened in India?
[Guest 2]: And I don't think it would have.
[Guest 2]: So I feel that, you know, this great man theory or great woman theory, I mean, there's no
[Guest 2]: this thing involved in that.
[Guest 2]: I think for sport, you need those kind of lucky breaks, you need those kind of once
[Guest 2]: in a generational breaks.
[Guest 2]: And I'd be really interested in hearing what Nandan has to say about that.
[Guest 1]: I mean, I largely agree and a lot of my work has been related to that is to create that
[Guest 1]: one example, which which what we call changes the script.
[Guest 1]: And that's that's a hashtag we use quite often, which is, we came in 2006, 7, I just found
[Guest 1]: so much cynicism about Indian sport, it was so different from the conversation we've just
[Guest 1]: had around the Tokyo Games, where there was disappointment coming from expectation.
[Guest 1]: Earlier, it was disappointment coming from just sort of, we're not good enough.
[Guest 1]: And this really doesn't matter.
[Guest 1]: And I just wanted to get out of that cynicism and start doing something it was I was a lawyer,
[Guest 1]: but I had a great interest in sport.
[Guest 1]: So I just said, Now, can we create new path breakers?
[Guest 1]: So I believe, okay, there's you, I can accept we don't have a sports culture.
[Guest 1]: How am I going to change people's mindsets?
[Guest 1]: I'm not going to tell them, hey, you don't know what you're doing.
[Guest 1]: You don't think like me, and we're good at sport.
[Guest 1]: But what can I do, I can create new examples, I can present new evidence, and allow people
[Guest 1]: to consider that evidence and see, am I willing to change my mind.
[Guest 1]: And that takes time, right?
[Guest 1]: So what we did is working with, in some sense, the unusual and the unexpected.
[Guest 1]: So looking at sports, which had not been supported, looking at disciplines, which mean may not
[Guest 1]: have had an Olympian yet.
[Guest 1]: So looking at diversity, not for its own sake, but for its ability to create that trailblazer
[Guest 1]: pathbreaker, I mean, these are sort of a little bit hyperbolic, but that person who creates
[Guest 1]: the first example, and I'll reconnect that to my story of being that person asked, do
[Guest 1]: you want to be a lawyer?
[Guest 1]: Or do you want to be a cricketer asked that question by the National Law School director,
[Guest 1]: I might still choose to be a lawyer.
[Guest 1]: But has that ratio changed?
[Guest 1]: I mean, for me, it was at 595.
[Guest 1]: How do I get that ratio to change?
[Guest 1]: How do I get people, key stakeholders and by that the most key stakeholder is actually
[Guest 1]: the parent of the sports child.
[Guest 1]: I think we underestimate the importance of what is going on in the parent's head.
[Guest 1]: And the conversation the parent has with the child, very rarely does a child decide what
[Guest 1]: sport they play.
[Guest 1]: Very often, it's the parent who initiates, the child might sort of click.
[Guest 1]: But the motivation is very often parental motivation.
[Guest 1]: And you look at the great Indian athletes, so many of them have super motivated and very
[Guest 1]: often sporting parents who go to extremes.
[Guest 1]: And it's something worth talking about is how difficult it is to be the parent of a
[Guest 1]: talented sports child today.
[Guest 1]: But the reality is, if we can change that conversation, the one that the child has with
[Guest 1]: the parent, and to me that those single people help change that conversation.
[Guest 1]: If a young person says, hey, I want to pursue fencing, what is the natural question a parent
[Guest 1]: is going to ask?
[Guest 1]: The parent is going to ask, show me one person who has made a living out of fencing.
[Guest 1]: Now India has that answer.
[Guest 1]: And I think that in my belief, you can change perceptions one athlete at a time.
[Guest 1]: And you are not going to go and say, hey, now change your perception that we can have
[Guest 1]: an Indian fencer.
[Guest 1]: The performance speaks for itself.
[Guest 1]: And that's the beauty of the Olympics.
[Guest 1]: We don't need to say she's a good fencer, she's gone out, done what she needs to do.
[Guest 1]: The next person aspiring to be a fencer, or for that matter, not even in sport, aspiring
[Guest 1]: to do something that has not been done before, it is a conversation changer.
[Guest 1]: So I do believe and I agree with Joy that one athlete can change trajectories.
[Guest 1]: And there's this notion of path dependency as well, right, the path that is tread.
[Guest 1]: The one thing I will add to that is there can be also confluences of events, where that
[Guest 1]: great athlete comes along with something else.
[Guest 1]: And I think we saw the sort of the airwaves and the privatization of the airwaves come
[Guest 1]: with Tendulkar as well, right?
[Guest 1]: And those are sort of, that's a double whammy competition in distribution, but also this
[Guest 1]: great athlete coming through.
[Guest 1]: You saw the 2007 World Cup coming with the IPL.
[Guest 1]: The IPL without the 2007 T20 World Cup win would have been nothing, I mean, not nothing,
[Guest 1]: but it gave it its sort of fumes, the Yuvaraj Singh 6-6s.
[Guest 1]: So there can be groupings of events to me that become this catalyzing effect, which
[Guest 1]: may, if one of them happened alone, may not have been adequate.
[Guest 1]: So that's sort of the addition I would make to one person can change it, but there can
[Guest 1]: be something else that gives it its fuel.
[Guest 1]: So timing can bring fortune, timing can bring confluence.
[Amit Varma]: No, I agree with both of you entirely, and I think individual dreamers like that can
[Amit Varma]: have that kind of impact.
[Amit Varma]: But I think what a sports administrator really has to do is find a way to enable the dreamers
[Amit Varma]: and to enable the dreaming and to make it seem practical.
[Amit Varma]: Before I move on to my next question, Nandan, I didn't at all finish that whole personal
[Amit Varma]: narrative of what your arc was like, which always interests me a lot.
[Amit Varma]: So let's quickly finish that arc that you're given that choice when you get into law school,
[Amit Varma]: you get your law degree, you go to Oxford on a road scholarship, whereas you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out every single college had better sporting infrastructure than your state.
[Amit Varma]: And then you go to Harvard Law School.
[Amit Varma]: And then you work three years abroad.
[Amit Varma]: And then you say, I'm not going to do this, I'm going to come back to India and do something
[Amit Varma]: for Indian sport.
[Amit Varma]: That seems so baffling and incredible to me.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about that.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me about, you know, how could you make that choice?
[Amit Varma]: What motivated you?
[Amit Varma]: Did you have specifics in mind that I will do ABC, or were you like that?
[Amit Varma]: And I'm going to go and figure it out, and I want to do something.
[Guest 1]: It was more the latter.
[Guest 1]: I mean, so I mean, I'd done what I needed to do, I just felt I'd spent my 20s.
[Guest 1]: I mean, I got so much privilege, so many opportunities, choose the place I wanted to study, and I'd
[Guest 1]: gotten, I'd got these chances.
[Guest 1]: And I'd given myself essentially six years, I'd said, I'm going to study for three years,
[Guest 1]: work for three years.
[Guest 1]: And I need to I need to be back, I mean, call me whatever it is, I could call me patriotic,
[Guest 1]: you could call me a homebody.
[Guest 1]: I just wanted to be home, and wanted to start figuring out where I can make a contribution
[Guest 1]: and be useful.
[Guest 1]: And in some sense, sport just found me again, I wanted to do sport, but it just the things
[Guest 1]: around me started, I'd done a lot by then, a lot of work on internet law, technology
[Guest 1]: law, intellectual property, all of which started becoming extremely useful in my sports law
[Guest 1]: practice.
[Guest 1]: I wanted to do sports law, but it didn't automatically come through.
[Guest 1]: Like I said, the IPL happens, lots of the people I played cricket with come back to
[Guest 1]: me and ask me legal questions.
[Guest 1]: So in some sense, sport reclaimed me.
[Guest 1]: And I think that that original love just was never lost.
[Guest 1]: And it attracted me back in a way that I really can't explain.
[Guest 1]: But I sort of dealt with each opportunity as it came, first started trying to work with
[Guest 1]: athletes represent them, but then move to a much more sort of use my skills well, and
[Guest 1]: my skills were law, and backed into working in sports law, sports regulation, sports governance,
[Guest 1]: but also figuring out how to buffer that there wasn't a huge amount of work to do.
[Guest 1]: So I also continued working on technology law, internet law, which were my specialties,
[Guest 1]: but then also started the foundation with a couple of other colleagues, in fact, from
[Guest 1]: my same school, where we really felt we had to sort of stop being so cynical, not be the
[Guest 1]: people who are sitting there cursing the television and say, Okay, I mean, we may not be experts,
[Guest 1]: we don't have the money, we don't have the expertise.
[Guest 1]: But what we do have is intent and desire and just a love for sport, which should count
[Guest 1]: for something sort of incorporated a nonprofit, a trust, Go Sports Foundation is what it ended
[Guest 1]: up becoming.
[Guest 1]: For years, it was extremely difficult.
[Guest 1]: I mean, there's so much cynicism, not just in people watching, but we ask someone for
[Guest 1]: money.
[Guest 1]: And they say, like, why are you wasting your time?
[Guest 1]: I mean, the people closest to me would have thought of me as and did think of me as extremely
[Guest 1]: naive.
[Guest 1]: It sounds like an absurd thing to do, right, you're giving up a law firm career, the sort
[Guest 1]: of the most structured profession you can think of in the US most disciplined, you get
[Guest 1]: want something done, it gets done in five minutes or 10 minutes.
[Guest 1]: You don't send an email out without reading it five times to make sure there's every full
[Guest 1]: stop and comma and come into the disorganized world of Indian sport, but there's something
[Guest 1]: attracted me to it.
[Guest 1]: And I think looking back, a lot of it is what sport gave me for identity, for confidence,
[Guest 1]: for who I became.
[Guest 1]: And also the skills that it gave me to navigate the world and life, even my educational opportunities,
[Guest 1]: I saw everything as something that could be gamified, something that you could figure
[Guest 1]: out the rules, play by the rules do well.
[Guest 1]: It gave me a lot of the tools to navigate the world.
[Guest 1]: And I started asking the broader questions of if it made some difference to me, can I
[Guest 1]: make it count similarly for other people.
[Guest 1]: And I wouldn't call any of the things I've gone through as scars, they were just more
[Guest 1]: observations of my own sort of being self critical of the life I'd lived.
[Guest 1]: I just felt from those learnings can something positive emerge and having had those opportunities,
[Guest 1]: time to flip it and do something meaningful, that counts for other people.
[Guest 1]: And using sport as a tool, which I thought was heavily underdone in our country.
[Guest 1]: Sport as a tool, not just for winning and identity and other things, but just sport
[Guest 1]: as a tool for living a better life at an individual level.
[Guest 1]: And in some sense, crafting a better society, a place where all of us sort of pursue excellence,
[Guest 1]: work on friendship, work on respect and just the spirit of Olympism.
[Guest 1]: Looking back now I hear all these words, but I think they were just intrinsic, that motivation
[Guest 1]: to work on these projects for that sake was just extremely intrinsic and just a lived
[Guest 1]: experience which I wanted to share in some sense.
[Guest 1]: So it wasn't any great altruism, I was just trying to find what I thought was a life worth
[Guest 1]: living and finding in some sense the joy in sharing what I found as meaningful.
[Amit Varma]: So before I get to you know, the specifics of what you know, your foundation does, which
[Amit Varma]: I'm very keen to learn more about a final broad question, you know, you mentioned the
[Amit Varma]: little kid who goes to his mom and says, Hey, I want to do fencing and the mom says, you
[Amit Varma]: know, but who is there who has been successful and now that kid can point to someone, but
[Amit Varma]: most of the time, like if a kid was to come to me, I would say that yeah, there is someone
[Amit Varma]: but that is survivorship bias.
[Amit Varma]: Is there an ecosystem, there's no ecosystem here, I don't see any league, I don't see
[Amit Varma]: anything.
[Amit Varma]: It's a scene in the unseen, right?
[Amit Varma]: The scene is that one kid who makes it, the unseen is the many, many other countless kids
[Amit Varma]: who don't make it.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, there is an opportunity cost for them for pursuing that.
[Amit Varma]: So I would say ki nahi yaar, woh Nandan ki tarah ban jaa, law kar le.
[Amit Varma]: And this is not something you would say to someone in cricket necessarily, because there
[Amit Varma]: is that rich ecosystem.
[Amit Varma]: Now it strikes me that when you set out to do whatever you do, the first goal would
[Amit Varma]: obviously be that, okay, let us support the athletes who are there, that who are the talented
[Amit Varma]: kids in whatever sports, let's support them.
[Amit Varma]: Your second goal down the road, though, has to be to build that ecosystem.
[Amit Varma]: So therefore, then, you know, instead of giving a boy a fish, you're teaching him how to fish,
[Amit Varma]: you're building an ecosystem which will produce its own stars, which will enable whoever wants
[Amit Varma]: to dream within that ecosystem.
[Amit Varma]: Now, this would seem to be an incredibly tough thing to do.
[Amit Varma]: But I would also imagine that, as I said, for futurists, as I often say, for creators,
[Amit Varma]: that we can tend to overestimate the short term, but underestimate the long term.
[Amit Varma]: Now both of you have sort of worked at creating these ecosystems.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, my episode with Joy earlier was called creating sports ecosystems, if I remember
[Amit Varma]: right, because, you know, you did a lot of work with during the football time of not
[Amit Varma]: just holding an event, but trying to introduce a culture of football across the country.
[Amit Varma]: And that was such an inspiring conversation for me to have.
[Amit Varma]: So I'd love your thoughts on one, in your experience of working with sport over the
[Amit Varma]: last decade and a half or so, longer than that, but in this specific context, that has
[Amit Varma]: there been a sense that yes, ecosystems can evolve, we should not be cynical.
[Amit Varma]: Today, there may not be an ecosystem for say, fencing, five years later, they can be we
[Amit Varma]: should have that hope we should work towards that, or at on certain margins, has it ever
[Amit Varma]: gotten frustrating that we are supporting talented sports people, but these are individuals,
[Amit Varma]: there's nothing broader and deeper happening.
[Amit Varma]: So what's your sort of sense of that?
[Guest 2]: So my sense of that is that definitely there is a much larger ecosystem than there was.
[Guest 2]: And again, what we were talking about the fact that there is a private public partnership,
[Guest 2]: something is happening, there is movement happening in sport, there is definitely movement
[Guest 2]: happening in sport, how well it's doing and how long term it is, is the basic question
[Guest 2]: that you have to ask yourself.
[Guest 2]: And I think that, you know, when you're coming to it, Indian sport now is well served at
[Guest 2]: the top level.
[Guest 2]: I think now between tops and Olympic gold quest, because remember, even more than this
[Guest 2]: thing, a lot of these people are saying they are very goal oriented, they are middle oriented,
[Guest 2]: and their reasons to be because funding, the sad bad fact of it is that, you know, and
[Guest 2]: Nandan tries his best.
[Guest 2]: And I know this is a very tough struggle to turn on and say that it's about the process,
[Guest 2]: not about the medals.
[Guest 2]: And it's, it's something that they actually go sports foundation talks about to people
[Guest 2]: who are, you know, trying to help them, you know, supporting this ecosystem.
[Guest 2]: But the fact of the matter is, medals matter, newspaper articles matter, you know, even
[Guest 2]: if a Deepak Karmakar does not get there to a medal place, at least she's there to place
[Guest 2]: where she's bought attention to gymnastics, you know.
[Guest 2]: So tomorrow, if there's a gymnastics athlete, somebody in the world of gymnastics is easier
[Guest 2]: for somebody to invest in and turn on and say that, okay, I like Deepak, there's something
[Guest 2]: here.
[Guest 2]: So I think the top level is well served.
[Guest 2]: I think the level below that, because it's in the hands of the Federation, and state
[Guest 2]: federations more than anything else, is really badly served at this point in time, it's tough,
[Guest 2]: it's difficult, because we basically create an ecosystem where we and this is true of
[Guest 2]: all sports.
[Guest 2]: So for example, I'll give you another example, in the 2017 World Cup, you know, the first
[Guest 2]: thing we went around when Javier and me joined as, you know, project director and tournament
[Guest 2]: director was, how good is the Indian team, do we have a chance?
[Guest 2]: And they turned on and they said something which is interesting, they said, we have 30-35
[Guest 2]: kids, we're going to put into a camp and give the best exposure for the next three years.
[Guest 2]: But what does that mean?
[Guest 2]: Does any developed country do that?
[Guest 2]: Will Brazil do that?
[Guest 2]: Will Argentina do that?
[Guest 2]: They look at the best, most talented 40 kids three months before, six months before, and
[Guest 2]: then get those in and decide which ones are going to play.
[Guest 2]: But we don't have that luxury, because we know that if we do that, these kids will just
[Guest 2]: not have enough exposure.
[Guest 2]: So what do we do?
[Guest 2]: We identify X number of kids, we put them together very early, and we hope we do that.
[Guest 2]: So that's, Amit, what we're doing well.
[Guest 2]: If an athlete is somewhere close to being Olympic worthy, medal worthy, I think today
[Guest 2]: GoSport, TOPS, JSW, OGQ, all are getting together to do a very, very decent job of making sure
[Guest 2]: that they lack for nothing in those last 20 yards.
[Guest 2]: But if you're looking at, say, if you think of it, you know, if you look at the analogy
[Guest 2]: as an Olympic sprint, it's like saying the first 80 meters of that 100-meter sprint,
[Guest 2]: there's nobody.
[Guest 2]: The last 20 meters, dude, we have all the support in the world you want.
[Guest 2]: And it's the first 80 meters, unfortunately, who does it rest with?
[Guest 2]: It rests with state organizations, it rests with organizations who don't really see results
[Guest 2]: at that stage.
[Guest 2]: And that's the real lacuna in the system.
[Guest 2]: And let me tell you one thing, there are two factors that are involved in it.
[Guest 2]: One is the fact that our federations are inefficient, which, unfortunately, you know, I've said
[Guest 2]: ad infinitum, but the second part of it is we really don't have a culture of checks and
[Guest 2]: balances.
[Guest 2]: Who will the checks and balances come?
[Guest 2]: They'll come from parents.
[Guest 2]: So for example, the example that I always give that, you know, Europe has fantastic
[Guest 2]: facilities, you have great soccer teams, and they win, it's not soccer, I shouldn't say
[Guest 2]: soccer anymore, football teams, and they keep winning.
[Guest 2]: But South America has won, also won eight World Cups.
[Guest 2]: Why have they won those World Cups?
[Guest 2]: Actually, nine World Cups, because they have won those World Cups because they have a passion
[Guest 2]: for the sport.
[Guest 2]: So if there's a local league happening, there's a local football match happening, people come
[Guest 2]: in and watch it, just like in the US.
[Guest 2]: You travel in the US, you stop at a small petrol pump, and they'll turn on and say,
[Guest 2]: you know what, that guy there, the petrol pump, he was an all-star athlete for school,
[Guest 2]: and they won us local championships in 2015.
[Guest 2]: There's a culture of that.
[Guest 2]: Why?
[Guest 2]: Because there's a culture of sport.
[Guest 2]: And that's the one thing, I tell parents, I said, forget everything else.
[Guest 2]: If you can go, one of you can go and watch your kids playing a football game, that'll
[Guest 2]: keep the coach honest, that'll keep the team honest, and that'll actually make sure that,
[Guest 2]: you know, stupid things are not happening at that level.
[Guest 2]: Because 50 to 70% of the best athletes drop out at that level, because, you know, somebody
[Guest 2]: else is there watching the sport whose father is more interested and wants his kid in.
[Guest 2]: And that's the point at which he leaves the sport and says, you know, I'd rather concentrate
[Guest 2]: on academics, it's less qualitative, the assessment is less qualitative and more operational.
[Guest 2]: And that's one of the biggest problems with Indian sport.
[Guest 2]: So these are the two basic issues that we are working with.
[Guest 2]: I mean, if you solve them, you're doing 90% of the journey of Indian sport.
[Guest 2]: You know, firstly, you're just doing the top level.
[Guest 2]: And B is that below that, you just don't have the domestic support, the support of people,
[Guest 2]: because this is not federations.
[Guest 2]: This is about other people supporting it to make sport work.
[Guest 1]: And I would agree there with Joy very much that it's not necessarily about sort of funding,
[Guest 1]: training and other things like that.
[Guest 1]: Sometimes all we need is more competition.
[Guest 1]: And we deal with this all the time with young athletes, there are many federations where
[Guest 1]: at best they hold the nationals, and that's once a year, so you'll have a sub junior nationals
[Guest 1]: or junior nationals.
[Guest 1]: And there's very little in between.
[Guest 1]: If you can only simply bring more competitions at the junior level, a lot of the other stuff
[Guest 1]: solves itself, you'll have academies that pick up coaches that get interested, but you
[Guest 1]: have to build a demand for coaching and build a demand for micro organizations to grow around
[Guest 1]: sport.
[Guest 1]: This is another sort of public private issue of how do you bring in more private interest
[Guest 1]: into sport into sports coaching, sports scouting, sports training, more sort of professional
[Guest 1]: services around that.
[Guest 1]: And the reality is for a young athlete today, if you want to play at the international level,
[Guest 1]: it's much more expensive to be an Indian athlete than it is to be, for example, a European
[Guest 1]: athlete.
[Guest 1]: And here I talk about let's say a sport like tennis, you take a young Spanish athlete was
[Guest 1]: a young Indian athlete, there's some tournaments that now are held, but the average Indian
[Guest 1]: athlete has to travel, let's say 15 times has to travel internationally a year just
[Guest 1]: to pick up the few ITF ranking points, while that Spanish equivalent, he's like literally
[Guest 1]: traveling 20 miles and playing a tournament, traveling next weekend somewhere else.
[Guest 1]: And like literally going home after the match, while the Indian is traveling international
[Guest 1]: flight ticket hotel parent has to probably go along.
[Guest 1]: So the cost of being an Indian athlete is in fact, in some cases much more than being
[Guest 1]: a European athlete.
[Guest 1]: So we're loading up costs.
[Guest 1]: And what does that mean that that means that the people who end up accessing some of those
[Guest 1]: opportunities are people with privilege, people with access, either to their own money or
[Guest 1]: to sources of funding.
[Guest 1]: And what we have to do is another way of democratizing is just building more tournament opportunities,
[Guest 1]: allowing competition to play out.
[Guest 1]: But when you do that, there are lots of very structural things to fix.
[Guest 1]: And one we cannot avoid is the issue of age fraud in India.
[Guest 1]: One of the largest issues which turns so many parents away is age cheating.
[Guest 1]: And that's across all sports, talk about cricket, talk about football.
[Guest 1]: I don't think there's a sport that hasn't been touched by age fraud, which is people
[Guest 1]: falsifying that age.
[Guest 1]: In fact, I mean, there's a ton of stories in terms of the way people have been people
[Guest 1]: born apparently in auto rickshaws, I mean, we have a genuine problem with being able
[Guest 1]: to tax someone's age on to some database, right?
[Guest 1]: And that is exploited and exposed quite often.
[Guest 1]: And the reality is something like this can be a structural barrier to keeping a young
[Guest 1]: person who's actually following the rules, keeping them in sport.
[Guest 1]: So I think you need competition.
[Guest 1]: But if you can't do that with integrity, you're also sort of devaluing the sport.
[Guest 1]: So there's both more activity, but also better activity and fixing some very, very fundamental
[Guest 1]: problems in youth and junior sport, which must happen at the same time.
[Guest 1]: And then allowing some of that ecosystem to evolve around.
[Guest 1]: Like I said, if you look at the sport of badminton, you look at the number of academies today
[Guest 1]: in badminton is fabulous.
[Guest 1]: Very few are government driven academies.
[Guest 1]: What did it take?
[Guest 1]: If you took one great coach to follow another great coach, you have a padukone followed
[Guest 1]: by a Gopichand and you have a whole sort of stable of athletes come out.
[Guest 1]: And then what's happened that the conversation with parents has changed, you can be a Olympic
[Guest 1]: medalist, you can sort of play on a professional circuit, the game has changed.
[Guest 1]: But it meant that suddenly hundreds more kids are buying badminton rackets, making a sort
[Guest 1]: of a supplier successful, joining academies, making coaches commercially successful.
[Guest 1]: But that comes from repetitious tournaments, which sort of separate the competitors from
[Guest 1]: the contenders and allow the resources of the state.
[Guest 1]: Let's accept that the state must fund a little bit, but that resources have to be funded
[Guest 1]: funding the sort of the optimal talent, not funding too early, and not funding too late.
[Guest 1]: And it's not an easy place to determine where to fund and how much the state should fund
[Guest 1]: when.
[Guest 1]: But it is a balance we will find only if we can push people up.
[Guest 1]: And there's enough quantity in the funnel to determine that the person is actually deserving.
[Guest 1]: And it's not just simply an anecdotal person who's sort of been lucky to get where they
[Guest 1]: are simply because other people didn't try or the pool of talent was not large enough.
[Guest 1]: So this is actually essential to the not just talent scouting, but the talent progression
[Guest 1]: pathway of recognizing how much of the resources of the state to spend on what level and there
[Guest 1]: are very efficient ways to do that, simply with strong sort of regional, state, local
[Guest 1]: and national competitions, but them happening at regular intervals, and the data from them
[Guest 1]: being collected and acted upon smartly.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's a great point.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, as I, you know, keep telling people who do my writing class, or as I keep telling
[Amit Varma]: creators that the only way to excellence is through endless iteration, you know, if I
[Amit Varma]: was recording one podcast episode a year, it would be pretty shitty.
[Amit Varma]: But for many young sports people, they have that one sub junior national event to go through.
[Amit Varma]: And even the point about falsifying age, we joke about that, but you are right that it
[Amit Varma]: can be very pernicious.
[Amit Varma]: I think Malcolm Gladwell had a study a few years ago or spoke about a study a few years
[Amit Varma]: ago in maybe outliers, where he spoke about how, you know, if you're playing at the under
[Amit Varma]: 13, or under 14 level, or whatever, studies have found that those born in Jan, Feb, March
[Amit Varma]: tend to do much better than those born in November and December, simply because the
[Amit Varma]: Freakonomics I think has that Freakonomics, yeah, oh, Freakonomics had it.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, I somehow thought Gladwell wrote about it.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe he also did.
[Amit Varma]: And the result of that is that, you know, at that age, the people who are in November
[Amit Varma]: and December can't keep up with their peers, who have those seven, eight extra months of
[Amit Varma]: development, which makes for a big difference.
[Amit Varma]: And so they tend to drop out.
[Amit Varma]: And if people are falsifying ages, it's not a question of months, it's a question of years.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, how are you really going to compete, I have a funny story about this, by the way,
[Amit Varma]: which is that, you know, I used to play chess in my teens.
[Amit Varma]: So I remember I once went to the Maharashtra Junior Chess Championships, and which was
[Amit Varma]: under 20.
[Amit Varma]: And I was 18 or 19 or whatever, I was well under the age this thing, but I had a beard,
[Amit Varma]: so Punjabi jeans and all that.
[Amit Varma]: So I had a proper beard, and after six rounds, I was a sole leader with six points in six
[Amit Varma]: rounds.
[Amit Varma]: And they had an English newspaper, which was a local English newspaper, which was the biggest
[Amit Varma]: selling English newspaper locally, but I forget what it was called.
[Amit Varma]: And the next day, I wasn't on the sports pages, I was on the front page, there was a photograph
[Amit Varma]: of me with the headline is this boy really under 19 or whatever the thing it was.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, I eventually shaved off my beard, but that didn't really help me.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah, I mean, that aside apart, I can see why it can have a pernicious effect.
[Amit Varma]: Let's get down to specifics, because, you know, I'm so fascinated, not just by the fact
[Amit Varma]: that you chose to embark on your journey, but that you've actually helped so many sports
[Amit Varma]: people like Deepak Karmarkar is just one example, you pointed out, but there are so many that
[Amit Varma]: you've helped.
[Amit Varma]: So can you tell me what your thought process was like when you started GoSports?
[Amit Varma]: Like, where are we going to make our specific interventions?
[Amit Varma]: Because obviously, you have also at that point, a paucity of resources in terms of time, mental
[Amit Varma]: bandwidth, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So where do you decide to make an intervention?
[Amit Varma]: Why?
[Amit Varma]: How do those areas of focus evolve over the years?
[Amit Varma]: And what are the kind of specific things you do?
[Amit Varma]: Like, is it identifying promising athletes and saying, okay, what do they need to train
[Amit Varma]: properly, we'll give them that much money?
[Amit Varma]: Or how does the thinking evolve?
[Guest 1]: So take me through that process.
[Guest 1]: So the first thing we did, and we tried to identify what is the problem we were trying
[Guest 1]: to solve, and that was the problem of dropout, where we recognize that people who should
[Guest 1]: not be dropping.
[Guest 1]: So sport has good dropout, the people who should be dropping out for the reason of sort
[Guest 1]: of attributing resources well, but there are people who should be progressing, but are
[Guest 1]: dropping out.
[Guest 1]: So we did a brief study at the very start, and trying to find the right age group to
[Guest 1]: make the intervention.
[Guest 1]: So we were we didn't have huge amounts of money we were raising from friends and family,
[Guest 1]: some amounts of funds, trying to make very specific interventions.
[Guest 1]: So five, six athletes, where did we feel that change could even the little money that we
[Guest 1]: had could make a difference.
[Guest 1]: So we also looked at certain different sports, which had not really been supported well,
[Guest 1]: like swimming, a few other sports, which had pretty large sort of middle potential, but
[Guest 1]: had not really been looked at in some depth, professionalizing that working with coaches,
[Guest 1]: so very small micro interventions, and it was a little bit ended up being like pilot
[Guest 1]: ish, raise a few lakhs, find five, six people give them out.
[Guest 1]: So it was really like cottage industry, nonprofit in the early bits.
[Guest 1]: But we started seeing that even small bits of support started, we started seeing feedback
[Guest 1]: from the system, people getting better stability coming into their lives.
[Guest 1]: And we said, Hey, this is making a difference, how can we up the game a little bit?
[Guest 1]: And how can we raise funds?
[Guest 1]: So by this time, I mean, I've also been running my law practice, I end up meeting a lot of
[Guest 1]: people along the way, they also start saying, Hey, how can we help out, I think they just
[Guest 1]: saw the intent.
[Guest 1]: And they saw naive bunch of people trying to do something.
[Guest 1]: And you end up attracting a certain type of person also to you is my belief when you show
[Guest 1]: intent and you show purpose.
[Guest 1]: And we ended up working with an Abhinav Bindra, Gopichand, Rahul Dravid, all of whom actually
[Guest 1]: came to us and said, let me know how I can help you.
[Guest 1]: And we had a few bits of fortune at work with Rohan Bhopanna, he got us Roger Federer racket,
[Guest 1]: and we auctioned it, we raised a pretty large amount of money and money from that auction
[Guest 1]: of Federer racket, Rahul Dravid cricket bat, all of that gave us our first sort of little
[Guest 1]: bit of extra money, where we started building a scholarship program.
[Guest 1]: At which point, sort of my experiences from different ways of looking at talent, thinking
[Guest 1]: about talent, we built a selection process, which includes sort of evaluation.
[Guest 1]: And very clearly, we're not going out and scouting, we're looking at people who are
[Guest 1]: out there.
[Guest 1]: And we have an application process and interview process, we build that out.
[Guest 1]: And it's sort of one thing leads to another, and we come to a point in some in about 2013,
[Guest 1]: when the CSR law changes.
[Guest 1]: So the CSR becomes mandatory for a lot of the companies.
[Guest 1]: And the CSR law originally had a bunch of different things in this schedule seven, which
[Guest 1]: lists all the things that qualify as CSR.
[Guest 1]: The interesting thing is, at that point, the person who makes an intervention got nothing
[Guest 1]: to do with us at that point of time is Abhinav Bindra talks to the corporate affairs ministry,
[Guest 1]: and says include access to support to sports.
[Guest 1]: So a specific entry comes in.
[Guest 1]: And if you want to talk about great man, the great man can work in different ways, not
[Guest 1]: just through achievement, but sort of different points like this, right.
[Guest 1]: And you get an entry in the company's act, which says, training of Olympic and Paralympic
[Guest 1]: athletes in national and rural sports as well.
[Guest 1]: So a specific entry comes in, which recognizes CSR as sport as CSR eligible.
[Guest 1]: And for us, by that time, we've worked with enough athletes to show that we sort of know
[Guest 1]: what we're doing.
[Guest 1]: We may not be experts, but there's good intent.
[Guest 1]: The foundation is also run sort of almost out of my law firm, very much legally oriented.
[Guest 1]: So a lot of paperwork, there's contracts, there's reports, all of the things that companies
[Guest 1]: want, right.
[Guest 1]: So we're at this interesting place where we have enough athletes needing the support.
[Guest 1]: And we're ready to talk the language of corporate India as well.
[Guest 1]: So in some sense, to translate the two worlds, speak corporate language to the athlete and
[Guest 1]: athlete language to the corporate.
[Guest 1]: And that has been the place where we've played for the last eight or 10 years.
[Guest 1]: And that's been in some sense, transformative.
[Guest 1]: So the thing we were able to do is support athletes in the early parts of their journeys,
[Guest 1]: maybe a step below many of the others.
[Guest 1]: And even before the government, very often, the only other source of support at the time
[Guest 1]: is parents, and in some cases, state government.
[Guest 1]: So we, what Joy talked about the last 20 meters, maybe we went from the 60th meter onwards.
[Guest 1]: So added another 20 meters to that, we would love for more and more people to solve the
[Guest 1]: rest of the 60 meters, but we had to start in a particular place.
[Guest 1]: And that's where we chose in some sense, what has led from there is just more and more people
[Guest 1]: recognizing that there is a role for sport, which is greater than sport.
[Guest 1]: It is not just about the medal.
[Guest 1]: It's the process.
[Guest 1]: It's what the process means to us as people.
[Guest 1]: But more than that, what does sport mean for India, you win a medal great, but I mean,
[Guest 1]: you can win what happens 30 years later, let's say we top the medal table, is the job done?
[Guest 1]: No, you have to figure out what is the role of sport in society?
[Guest 1]: What is it changing?
[Guest 1]: What is our perception of our own identities, our capabilities, there's a very beautiful
[Guest 1]: thing that happened at this Olympics, and Joy had a role to play in that Joy talked
[Guest 1]: about the, that sensitization program that we helped run for all of the athletes.
[Guest 1]: If you notice, almost all of the athletes by the end of their game, whether they won
[Guest 1]: or lost, they ended with a namaste.
[Guest 1]: And the beautiful photos of Sindhu, Mirabai, the namaste at the end of that, and just sort
[Guest 1]: of so proudly Indian at the end of that.
[Guest 1]: It's one of the things Joy recommended, I was so happy to see many of the athletes do.
[Guest 1]: And I think all of those little things matter, whether you there at the Olympics, how you
[Guest 1]: represent yourself, what you do, and what it means to India, in some sense, unashamedly
[Guest 1]: patriotic India at the Olympics was a fabulous thing.
[Guest 1]: People went in heads held high, were disappointed when they lost, when they won, they won confidently.
[Guest 1]: And to me, that ended a journey that I had sort of begun personally, it wasn't me who
[Guest 1]: solved it.
[Guest 1]: I was a co participant along the way.
[Guest 1]: But we saw a well resourced, confident Indian athlete who belong there and believe they
[Guest 1]: belong there.
[Guest 1]: And like I said, the medals were incidental to me, fantastic and fabulous to celebrate.
[Guest 1]: We could have got more, we could have gotten less.
[Guest 1]: But still, this was a very personal level, sort of the closure of a journey that I had
[Guest 1]: personally begun, and a great amount of satisfaction to see the way the athletes competed, and
[Guest 1]: sort of the broader perception of what the value and role of athletes is in society.
[Guest 1]: I think we have turned the corner and I'm optimistic of what the future holds as well.
[Amit Varma]: That Namaste story is really inspiring, kudos to you, Joy.
[Amit Varma]: And it reminds me of, you know, what Tagore used to say and what Ram Guha also talks about
[Amit Varma]: whenever he's on the show about the difference between patriotism and nationalism.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, incorporating a little symbolic thing like that seems to me to be the best
[Amit Varma]: kind of patriotism.
[Amit Varma]: My next question is something that both of you must have at different points in time
[Amit Varma]: dealt with, which is that, okay, this is a largely private, voluntary initiative to make
[Amit Varma]: things happen to make our sportsmen better to, you know, bring pride to the country or
[Amit Varma]: whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, the state runs the sport.
[Amit Varma]: You have to interface with the federations, you have to interface with the governments.
[Amit Varma]: Did they ever feel threatened when you guys were doing, you know, the separate things
[Amit Varma]: that you were doing in your particular domains?
[Amit Varma]: Was that a problem?
[Amit Varma]: Was there a problem of, hey, you know, I am in charge, or I should get the credit here,
[Amit Varma]: you know, whatever you're doing, you know, did you take my permission before doing this
[Amit Varma]: or blah, blah, blah?
[Amit Varma]: Is there that kind of friction within the system?
[Amit Varma]: And if so, you know, how did you kind of navigate that?
[Guest 2]: So first of all, if you look at the system and where it stands, cricket, for example,
[Guest 2]: is completely out of the system, because, you know, really it's not a sport that depends
[Guest 2]: on any of this and all this.
[Guest 2]: So cricket does not bother about what happens, what doesn't happen.
[Guest 2]: With a lot of the other sports, I think Nandan would have seen a bunch of other sports, where
[Guest 2]: I saw a couple of team sports.
[Guest 2]: And the fact of the matter is that it is very difficult.
[Guest 2]: There are egos involved, there are people involved, and it's very individual based.
[Guest 2]: And again, the more loose the system is, you know, you have an autocrat running the system,
[Guest 2]: sometimes a good autocrat, sometimes a bad autocrat.
[Guest 2]: But as far as I'm concerned, as Nandan will probably concur, I'd rather the autocrat be
[Guest 2]: the rules rather than an individual.
[Guest 2]: And in most cases in Indian sport, it's an individual rather than the rules.
[Guest 2]: So sometimes you'll have a good dictator running it, but he's still a dictator.
[Guest 2]: Because he's running it his way, and he has all the right intentions in the world.
[Guest 2]: And he probably doesn't want to make money out of the sport, but he's running it in a
[Guest 2]: particular way because he thinks that's the way the sport should be run.
[Guest 2]: And what Nandan believes, and I believe in also totally, is that if we could make those
[Guest 2]: rules much better, that the system and the rules are running it, and we are working within
[Guest 2]: those rules, or whoever is in there is running within those rules, that would be a far better
[Guest 2]: outcome.
[Guest 2]: But it doesn't unfortunately happen as often as we would think.
[Guest 2]: And therefore, those are the problems that Indian sport has.
[Guest 2]: And those are the problems we'll grapple with as long as we cannot clear these lacunas in
[Guest 2]: Indian sport.
[Guest 2]: But I'm confident as one of the good things that's happening is the more results you get,
[Guest 2]: you know, and social media is a powerful thing, much more powerful than you would think.
[Guest 2]: And here when the pressure is brought to bear saying that, you know, this is what it is,
[Guest 2]: and these are people who are funding it, these people are making things happen, it's slowly
[Guest 2]: going to reach a position that is for a lot of these places who are intransigent right
[Guest 2]: now, more and more untenable.
[Guest 2]: They'll reach a stage where they have to turn around and say that, you know what, we can't
[Guest 2]: just go around doing whatever we want to anymore.
[Guest 2]: And you've seen cases already, I think, wrestling, or even shooting, whatever it is, is it a
[Guest 2]: bad thing, is it a good thing that things are out in public?
[Guest 2]: You know, you can turn around and say that, you know, you'd rather talk, wash your dirty
[Guest 2]: linen in public.
[Guest 2]: But I believe it's important for the process of purging the system and saying, OK, what
[Guest 2]: is it?
[Guest 2]: Let's get down and find out what's wrong.
[Guest 2]: And yes, there's going to be over sensationalization now.
[Guest 2]: But over the next two years, or at least the next year before, say, the next Asian Games
[Guest 2]: or Commonwealth Games comes, if there's a little bit of understanding of what went wrong
[Guest 2]: here, and somebody saying that, you know, if you don't do it right, next time, there'll
[Guest 2]: be a problem.
[Guest 2]: I think that's good for Indian sport.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, so what we do try and do is find as much alignment as possible.
[Guest 1]: The reality is that the model itself, the GoSports model was structured in a way that
[Guest 1]: no one could stop us from supporting athletes.
[Guest 1]: What we saw ourselves as was a civic society organization.
[Guest 1]: Can anyone stop me from supporting a fellow individual?
[Guest 1]: No.
[Guest 1]: I mean, you can stop me from running a league, you will try and stop me from running a league,
[Guest 1]: you can stop me from sponsoring a tournament, but you can't stop me from supporting a fellow
[Guest 1]: Indian.
[Guest 1]: So I was very conscious of that in structuring the intervention itself.
[Guest 1]: Not to say that we haven't found sort of pushback as well, we've even had a federation send
[Guest 1]: us a legal notice saying that we were violating their intellectual property by supporting
[Guest 1]: their athletes.
[Guest 1]: I think the wrong person to send that notice to, but not that we haven't seen that.
[Guest 1]: But I think we've been very careful to support athletes, I mean, support of fellow human
[Guest 1]: being, which person in their right mind is going to stop you.
[Guest 1]: So the structure of how we made that intervention, and finding these inroads in was an important
[Guest 1]: sort of structuring issue.
[Guest 1]: And we did that early.
[Guest 1]: And I think we found a way to make it work for everyone.
[Guest 1]: And I think the real success in the model was in just how we integrated into the Target
[Guest 1]: Olympic podium scheme, very, very sort of large hearted team there, which really saw
[Guest 1]: everyone as an ally, could have seen everyone as a threat.
[Guest 1]: And I think previous iterations of the same scheme might have seen other people as a threat
[Guest 1]: and said, only you or you can either be with a private foundation or us, we want 100% credit,
[Guest 1]: no one else should take credit.
[Guest 1]: But it was a much more open hearted, much more collaborative, you tell us how you can
[Guest 1]: help.
[Guest 1]: Let's share information.
[Guest 1]: Let's make you have resources, you're bringing in maybe CSR resources that we can't tap,
[Guest 1]: maybe you have a different structure, which brings that money in, we have government funds.
[Guest 1]: Let's make both of those work.
[Guest 1]: It may be in whatever ratio, you may be me, you may have a smaller amount, but you may
[Guest 1]: have more time and attention to spend on a particular athlete.
[Guest 1]: Let's make that work.
[Guest 1]: And I think that positivity has huge amounts of wings to be taken forward to find these
[Guest 1]: private public collaborations.
[Guest 1]: But in ways that the public structure is protected, and private bodies act with responsibility
[Guest 1]: as well.
[Guest 1]: I think you'd be very, very careful because this narrative can also become individuals
[Guest 1]: becoming saviors of sport in India.
[Guest 1]: I mean, it can cross your own mind saying, hey, I'm making all this difference, and it's
[Guest 1]: because of me, and I'm the great man, right?
[Guest 1]: So I think the worst thing is to build that great man theory in your own head, is that
[Guest 1]: you are the transformative great man.
[Guest 1]: And I think everyone needs to recognize you have three choices in Indian sport, you can
[Guest 1]: either be a participant, a spectator or a bystander.
[Guest 1]: And I think everyone has the choice to make of where they want to play.
[Guest 1]: And if you're, I mean, full respect to you, if you just want to be a bystander, you'll
[Guest 1]: sort of read the newspapers once every four years, you can be a spectator and participate
[Guest 1]: and make sport more successful.
[Guest 1]: But to me, I've always seen myself as a co-participant along with athletes along with federations
[Guest 1]: along with the government.
[Guest 1]: And I'll do my bit and I'd love for everyone else to do their bit.
[Guest 1]: So there is a progression, can you move from bystander to spectator, spectator to participant,
[Guest 1]: there are ways to participate and we will all find ways to participate if we really
[Guest 1]: want to.
[Guest 1]: I just found one way which was civic participation through support to fellow athletes, fellow
[Guest 1]: Indians.
[Guest 1]: And really no one could stop me.
[Guest 1]: And if anything, the government and others, federations included have been encouraging
[Guest 1]: and saying you're doing something we haven't been able to do.
[Guest 1]: In fact, I take as the I was participating in the drafting of the top scheme many years
[Guest 1]: ago.
[Guest 1]: In many ways, I'd like to think that a lot of our ideas have been improved upon and given
[Guest 1]: scale by the government.
[Guest 1]: So there's a startup versus sort of mature relationship going on as well, where a startup
[Guest 1]: can think and think of new things, new ways of doing and it can be adopted at scale by
[Guest 1]: the government.
[Guest 1]: So we're going to see more and more progression.
[Guest 1]: Sport is getting more and more and more competitive while we look at these process improvements.
[Guest 1]: The countries are advancing so much on sports science, on analytics, on performance enhancement,
[Guest 1]: on just huge amounts of, I mean, we may be walking now, but they have been running.
[Guest 1]: And if we want to keep up, we want to go up the medals table, there's lots more work to
[Guest 1]: do.
[Guest 1]: And it's not about sort of capturing turf, capturing territory, determining who is going
[Guest 1]: to get credit.
[Guest 1]: It's about moving forward and looking at the bigger game and knowing that everyone has
[Guest 1]: a specific role to play.
[Guest 1]: And I think Joy might have more to offer, but I mean, that's a perspective.
[Guest 1]: I don't know how many people share with me, but it's something I'm extremely passionate
[Guest 1]: about is that everyone has a stake in sport and everyone has a stake in sports governance.
[Guest 1]: You just don't realize it yet if you aren't a participant.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, these are very inspiring and insightful words.
[Amit Varma]: And I think listeners, you know, listening to this episode, seeing your humility might
[Amit Varma]: just have found new sporting heroes.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it's also fascinating, I could talk for three more hours about this, but we've
[Amit Varma]: already spoken for three hours.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll end with three final questions.
[Amit Varma]: So that's like three threes right there.
[Amit Varma]: My third last question is really for Nandan, that tell me a little bit about TOPS, what
[Amit Varma]: it did, who were the stakeholders, how they came together, and then specifically tell
[Amit Varma]: me about the run up to Tokyo.
[Amit Varma]: Like you've pointed out that, you know, this was different from all Olympics, you know,
[Amit Varma]: though you won't use a phrase, I'd say the expected value of the Indian contingent was
[Amit Varma]: much greater than previous Olympics, perhaps even if we got seven medals, you know, we
[Amit Varma]: could easily have done more, as you point out.
[Amit Varma]: What was the difference?
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about that about, you know, what changed earlier, you said the Hockey
[Amit Varma]: Federation changed a lot, great things happened in fencing, for example, where you wouldn't
[Amit Varma]: expect them to.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about the good work of these, you know, the last few years.
[Guest 1]: So I think the like I said, the thing that changed was the scheme came out in 2013-14.
[Guest 1]: It was issued in end of 2014.
[Guest 1]: In fact, I was the one who got to choose the name even and then the logo of it.
[Guest 1]: So it was very interesting exercise I went through with the sports ministry didn't do
[Guest 1]: very well in the early stages.
[Guest 1]: And I think there's an article recently by Amrit Mathur, which reflects this and, and
[Guest 1]: the challenges that the sports ministry itself saw with its own scheme, in some sense, losing
[Guest 1]: power over decision making.
[Guest 1]: But what happened is that Rio was a disaster games for us, right, with just two medals.
[Guest 1]: And I think it opened people's eyes to okay, we just need to get this right.
[Guest 1]: And in fact, the scheme got transformed in ways known and unknown, seen and unseen over
[Guest 1]: the last five years.
[Guest 1]: But with a proper professional structure, we have Commander Rajesh Rajagopalan, former
[Guest 1]: Navy Commander, come in as CEO, a full team get built a professional team in the way that
[Guest 1]: any of our organizations would have built it.
[Guest 1]: So it becomes almost like a SWAT unit within the ministry.
[Guest 1]: And the Sports Authority of India, you have a supportive Director General of the Sports
[Guest 1]: Authority of India, supportive Secretary, what they do is build this as the Indian Olympic
[Guest 1]: platform, they figure out ways in which federations can be worked with.
[Guest 1]: So respect the autonomy, bring the federation in help with the selection help with the sort
[Guest 1]: of the programming and planning.
[Guest 1]: So respect the regulatory function, but work with the athlete on the funding.
[Guest 1]: So there's still more work to do.
[Guest 1]: It's not a perfect scheme.
[Guest 1]: But what it did is it moved the funding decision away from the federation, and to a slightly
[Guest 1]: more centralized model of a like a high performance management team, making funding and training
[Guest 1]: decisions, which included, for example, I think 80 lakhs spent sending Meera Bhai Chanu
[Guest 1]: to the US simply to work with the best physical fitness instructor in terms of how to increase
[Guest 1]: the I think six or eight kgs that she increased in her weight in the last 12 months after
[Guest 1]: having been injured.
[Guest 1]: So the right biomechanical expert, this would have been unheard of, eight or 10 years ago,
[Guest 1]: 70 lakhs for one athlete for whatever, three months or six months, you had whole teams
[Guest 1]: go to other countries so that they didn't have to deal with quarantine.
[Guest 1]: So the money was not in question, best resource possible.
[Guest 1]: But what it also did was it looked at this much beyond just Tokyo.
[Guest 1]: So it built in more recent years a developmental pool.
[Guest 1]: So it's already picked the 250 which may be going to the 2028 games.
[Guest 1]: So looking at people who are still eight or 10 years away, I mean, now Paris is just three
[Guest 1]: years away.
[Guest 1]: So people are already in training, which was a positive.
[Guest 1]: But other little things which we had originally planned, but got executed only much later,
[Guest 1]: which is everyone on the scheme got a stipend.
[Guest 1]: So for the first time they were paid, it was almost like a central contract that an Indian
[Guest 1]: cricketer would get, I mean, incomparable in terms of the quantity, but the fact that
[Guest 1]: it started happening, meant that you respected and recognize that sport is a livelihood issue
[Guest 1]: for many of these people, is that people are playing and need to support families.
[Guest 1]: So those are very, very fundamental, but game shifting changes that occur.
[Guest 1]: And that brings the confidence to the athlete.
[Guest 1]: It also brought full hockey teams within its limit.
[Guest 1]: So while the Orissa government also funded, became a sponsor, gave Orissa a home, the
[Guest 1]: top scheme also funded both hockey teams, which was incredible.
[Guest 1]: And it includes the coach is hired by the Federation, but also paid for by the Sports
[Guest 1]: Authority of India.
[Guest 1]: So there's a system that is coming in, which no longer is asking, are you priority discipline?
[Guest 1]: If so, your Federation will get the money and will get distributed.
[Guest 1]: If you are an Olympic contender, and you've qualified for the Olympics or in that range,
[Guest 1]: you have a shot to directly transact with the government, no longer through sort of
[Guest 1]: ad hoc schemes earlier, you'd either get the money through your Federation, or there was
[Guest 1]: the National Sports Development Fund, where you could apply and on an ad hoc basis, the
[Guest 1]: sort of the most elite athletes would get some amount, but without any systematization
[Guest 1]: to that.
[Guest 1]: But in this, whatever 120 plus contingent, I would say over 90% or more were on the top
[Guest 1]: scheme for a large period of time.
[Guest 1]: And there were probably another 50 people who didn't make it to Tokyo who were also
[Guest 1]: on the top scheme.
[Guest 1]: So you've got a sustained run of three, four, five years of support.
[Guest 1]: People turned up at the Olympics well resourced and in a position where they weren't thinking,
[Guest 1]: hey, I'm just here to turn up.
[Guest 1]: And I have got the entire pathway of being able to be at my best.
[Guest 1]: Now it's sort of just come and try and sort of put your mind to rest and perform.
[Guest 1]: And that is a sort of a moment in time in Olympic and Paralympic sport history.
[Guest 1]: And I must mention the Paralympics, which is still coming up and it starts at the end
[Guest 1]: of the month.
[Guest 1]: My guess is we'll have an even better Paralympics than we did in the Olympics.
[Guest 1]: And that recognition of equity of bringing everyone under the same umbrella, the top
[Guest 1]: scheme includes multiple dozen Paralympians as well.
[Guest 1]: These are massive shifts, I mean, they might sound basic to the average listener, but these
[Guest 1]: are huge shifts over a 10, 15 year period in Indian sport.
[Guest 1]: And it is a sign of the recognition of role of sport in society and not just medals for
[Guest 1]: their own sake.
[Guest 1]: I think there's a recognition of what sport can do at sort of secondary levels and sort
[Guest 1]: of the value it will deliver outside the pyramid to non-participants to what we consider ourselves
[Guest 1]: to be capable of.
[Guest 1]: And it is that recognition that excites me in the next stages, which is the recognition
[Guest 1]: of a collective, that there is a collective interest and that sport is in some sense of
[Guest 1]: commons that we all build together and that we will all benefit from.
[Amit Varma]: Wow, mind blowing.
[Amit Varma]: So my penultimate question for the day is really about private players, like in the
[Amit Varma]: sense we've discussed earlier in this episode about how a lot of private players rushed
[Amit Varma]: in to do these leagues for different sports after the IPL and all of that, and just no
[Amit Varma]: deeper thinking into it, just kind of following the trend and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And there, of course, I would say that, yeah, silly moves, but let everybody try everything
[Amit Varma]: and whatever works, works.
[Amit Varma]: Also recently, what we've seen on Twitter, for example, is that a lot of companies are
[Amit Varma]: doing moment marketing, they're trying to sort of expropriate the, you know, the image
[Amit Varma]: of athletes under the guise of congratulating them.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something that Joy, you've been tweeting about a fair bit, the dominoes effect,
[Amit Varma]: as it were, where these random companies will come up and they have not funded any athletes,
[Amit Varma]: they have nothing to do with any of this.
[Amit Varma]: And they'll be like, hey, we congratulate so and so and they'll get some brand building
[Amit Varma]: out of that.
[Amit Varma]: So this is sort of the seamy side of it, what you kind of expect from many corporates and
[Amit Varma]: all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But equally, there is, you know, a wholesome side to it, where many corporates have actually,
[Amit Varma]: you know, opened their coffers to support these athletes, and they can't even advertise
[Amit Varma]: it right now, because apparently IOC has that time period in which their sponsors can talk
[Amit Varma]: about it and you can't so the people who actually put money into these athletes are not allowed
[Amit Varma]: to talk about it, is random people jumping on the bandwagon.
[Amit Varma]: But my deeper question is that, what shape can private involvement take in sport in the
[Amit Varma]: future?
[Amit Varma]: Because on the one hand, you have this imperative that everything that a company does on spending,
[Amit Varma]: you have to keep an ROI in mind that what is my ROI in this.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I think, hopefully, at this point in time, it will start becoming apparent that,
[Amit Varma]: listen, there is an ROI, sport is a big deal, it can uplift a nation, when someone like
[Amit Varma]: Neeraj Chopra wins a gold, it, you know, it can have all these knock on benefits.
[Amit Varma]: So what are the sort of different ways in which you envisage private players who want
[Amit Varma]: to contribute, whether it's companies or foundations or individuals?
[Amit Varma]: What are the different ways in which they can plug into the ecosystem and actually play
[Amit Varma]: that part?
[Amit Varma]: So what is the shape of private involvement in the future?
[Guest 2]: So two things, there are many ways of going about it.
[Guest 2]: But the first is that, look, even now, even given all the CSR funding that is happening
[Guest 2]: in sport, that's still much less than it actually can be.
[Guest 2]: There's still a huge amount of place in CSR, because you're talking about 2% of the profits
[Guest 2]: of lots of organizations.
[Guest 2]: And therefore, in the CSR pile, you know, again, roti, kapra and makhan has taken priority,
[Guest 2]: but sport can also take a priority, because sport in its own way is equally transformative.
[Guest 2]: And I'll tell you one more thing.
[Guest 2]: You know, you look at the Odisha government, we've been talking about the Odisha government,
[Guest 2]: the Odisha government has spent on football, they've spent on hockey.
[Guest 2]: Everyone knows about that.
[Guest 2]: They've spent on Olympics.
[Guest 2]: One of the reasons they've spent is they're not fools.
[Guest 2]: The amount of bang for the buck that sport gives you for a 5 crore investment or a 10
[Guest 2]: crore investment, if you want to make a 5 kilometer highway, the amount of money it
[Guest 2]: takes you, you can sponsor a team for a year, and it makes a difference.
[Guest 2]: So what I'm trying to say is that given the kind of money you spend in sport for the kind
[Guest 2]: of benefit and rub off you get out of it, more and more states are beginning to understand
[Guest 2]: that it's a ratio that actually works hugely in favor of sport.
[Guest 2]: And you know, I have this great story that I keep telling and I bring it back to cricket,
[Guest 2]: is that I call it the cricket effect.
[Guest 2]: So by cricket, I mean, I don't mean cricket as in the game, but as in the insect.
[Guest 2]: If I was to give Mukesh Ambani the books of Reliance and say, find in these whatever thousands
[Guest 2]: and thousands of crores, find the Mumbai Indians, he would take half an hour, 45 minutes to
[Guest 2]: just find that 200 crore entry, 250 crore, whatever it is, among those thousands and
[Guest 2]: thousands and hundreds and thousands of crores.
[Guest 2]: But the share of voice of the Mumbai Indians as compared to the kind of investment of value
[Guest 2]: the Mumbai Indians is huge.
[Guest 2]: Sport is a cricket.
[Guest 2]: It shouts much, much larger on many, many more pages than you would think.
[Guest 2]: And therefore, forget about everything else.
[Guest 2]: Let's forget for once that there are people who are as decent as Nandan Kamath and I.
[Guest 2]: I rarely have met such decent people in this part of the universe.
[Guest 2]: Forget that they have altruistic motives.
[Guest 2]: So purely, sport is so underleveraged in this country that if you actually spend on sport,
[Guest 2]: you will get rewards disproportionate to the kind of money you spend.
[Guest 2]: That's a fact because they're so underleveraged that there's so much time and so little money
[Guest 2]: is being spent right now that even to spend a little bit of incremental money, you'll
[Guest 2]: get this much share of voice.
[Guest 2]: Have you realized the amount of voice even in Odisha has got right now?
[Guest 2]: Then look at the books and then you will have a sober look at the books.
[Guest 2]: You won't realize it's not that much money.
[Guest 2]: So first and foremost, I just want to tell people sport is still in India for the next
[Guest 2]: five to 10 foreseeable future, a very good investment opportunity.
[Guest 2]: You're going to get more than enough value, more than enough bang for your buck.
[Guest 2]: That's the first part of it.
[Guest 2]: And then the second part of it is that once this journey starts, if you are in on the
[Guest 2]: ground floor, the opportunities of yours rising with the sport are absolutely huge.
[Guest 2]: So that's what I would go for because see, it's easy enough to tell people that do this
[Guest 2]: for the good of the country.
[Guest 2]: But I generally don't buy that as a concept and altruism does not fuel basic economics.
[Guest 2]: It's got to be that I see value in it and it's easier for me to spend money here and
[Guest 2]: get value than it is somewhere else.
[Guest 2]: And that's the only way money is going to come.
[Guest 2]: And I'm telling you in Indian sport, that value is there today.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, I would totally agree with Joy, there are business models and their business models.
[Guest 1]: And I think one of the business models is using sport for branding, right?
[Guest 1]: So participating in the great branding game.
[Guest 1]: And I totally agree the easiest way to get into a newspaper is on the sports page.
[Guest 1]: It requires sort of the least effort to some tournament you name, you can get a photo in
[Guest 1]: and that is just a sort of an example of the disproportionate share like Joy says.
[Guest 1]: Many would argue that we as GoSports are just so minuscule, but get a disproportionate amount
[Guest 1]: of credit.
[Guest 1]: And I do recognize that and it's important to recognize that you can give to sport and
[Guest 1]: but you can't take from sport, sport will give you when it's ready.
[Guest 1]: But to answer your question, I think CSR is powerful, but it's incumbent on people like
[Guest 1]: us, but also companies to recognize that it is not sport for its own sake, but also sport
[Guest 1]: for a tool to solve a lot of other problems.
[Guest 1]: And I think that those problems are so many that it's you can't even list them.
[Guest 1]: There have been great examples, even for example, of sport in criminal justice of dealing with
[Guest 1]: recidivism in prisons, putting up a basketball court in a prison.
[Guest 1]: How can you use that effectively for CSR funds?
[Guest 1]: Imagine what can spurt from there and what is possible.
[Guest 1]: I'd also like to refer to something I was reading recently, a friend Sanjeev Jain and
[Guest 1]: Alok Sarin, two very famous psychiatrists have written and put together an anthology
[Guest 1]: on the psychological impact of the partition in India.
[Guest 1]: So very important book, which talks about the fact that we haven't processed psychologically
[Guest 1]: the partition, but it's just one line that really struck me in there, which sort of refers
[Guest 1]: to a UNESCO study that happened in the early fifties, looking back at the partition.
[Guest 1]: And it made this observation, which said that the rates of violence that is intercommunal
[Guest 1]: violence are low in places where the children of the communities played together.
[Guest 1]: So the statistics which said that around the playgrounds of these various cities like Aligarh
[Guest 1]: and others, the violence rate was less.
[Guest 1]: Why?
[Guest 1]: Because the people who lived there had played together and their children played together.
[Guest 1]: So imagine a more active playing India.
[Guest 1]: I know it's altruistic joy and I think that altruism doesn't necessarily fund salaries,
[Guest 1]: but there is a larger play.
[Guest 1]: It is not medals for its own sake.
[Guest 1]: And I think the same study also talks about this notion of moving beyond literacy of numbers
[Guest 1]: and letters, but moving to a literacy of understanding and a large part of that is rootedness and
[Guest 1]: identity of recognizing we are on a common path and there's rootedness of being together.
[Guest 1]: And I don't think there's a better thing than sport to do that.
[Guest 1]: I could disagree with everything that you believe in your politics, your relationship
[Guest 1]: with gender.
[Guest 1]: I could hate everything, but we can both celebrate Meera Chopra.
[Guest 1]: And there's a universality and beauty to that, which we must capture and must recognize and
[Guest 1]: must value.
[Guest 1]: And seeing this as a much larger game than just medals, we are part of a large social
[Guest 1]: engineering project.
[Guest 1]: And I don't mean that in a negative way.
[Guest 1]: It's an opportunity which we must see a sport as an instrument to deliver results, not sports
[Guest 1]: for its own sake, not medals for their own sake.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, that's a stunning insight about parents whose kids play together, less likely
[Amit Varma]: to fight.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it gives a whole new meaning to Orwell's term of war minus the shooting.
[Amit Varma]: And I completely agree with, you know, what you said, Joy, about, you know, appealing
[Amit Varma]: to the self interest of companies that don't do something just for CSR or just because
[Amit Varma]: it's mandated or just whatever, do it because it's good for you.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a, you know, great example of reliance and Mumbai Indians, one could argue that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, cricket is low hanging fruit and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But I mean, look at the goodwill if, you know, you had funded Meera Chopra for the last five
[Amit Varma]: years, look at the goodwill you would get just for that.
[Amit Varma]: So there's just tremendous opportunity in thinking ahead.
[Amit Varma]: My final question to many guests tends to be on what gives them hope and what gives
[Amit Varma]: them despair in whatever their specific subject or context is over the next 10 years.
[Amit Varma]: I don't want to ask you about despair.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, obviously, what would give you despair as if things stay the same or we go backwards
[Amit Varma]: or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But both of you are working for hope in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me, you know, 10 years later, if you're looking at the India of 2031, you know, what
[Amit Varma]: do you think is a realistic place for Indian sport to be in?
[Amit Varma]: At a philosophical level, I don't see why the Olympics should be a goal at all or any
[Amit Varma]: of that.
[Amit Varma]: But in general, do you think, for example, that we will ever become a major player at
[Amit Varma]: the Olympics and start competing with China in the US and whatever?
[Amit Varma]: What's the sort of landscape that you see?
[Guest 2]: What are you moving towards?
[Guest 2]: So first, I'll start off with, you know, you're talking about the Olympics, I just want to
[Guest 2]: talk about the World Cup football, which is, you know, the other mega event.
[Guest 2]: So in the 1980s, the Japanese came together with a plan saying that we want to win a World
[Guest 2]: Cup.
[Guest 2]: Their plan was a 100-year plan.
[Guest 2]: So in 1982, they turned around and said that in 2082, we want to win a World Cup.
[Guest 2]: And now they've actually, after about 25, 30 years, their plan, they've said, you know
[Guest 2]: what, we possibly might win one by 2050.
[Guest 2]: That's the kind of gestation period in football, and that's not necessarily the case in all
[Guest 2]: sport.
[Guest 2]: So what I'm trying to say is that if you're going to work in sport, those are the kind
[Guest 2]: of decades or the kind of numbers that you're going to look at to make significant differences.
[Guest 2]: It's taken 13 years for us to progress from Abhinav Bindra to where we are.
[Guest 2]: And Nandan's right, possibly, you know, given what we had, the potential was for maybe 10,
[Guest 2]: 12 medals rather than, you know, just, you know, the seven medals that we got.
[Guest 2]: And it's one of those things.
[Guest 2]: But what I'm saying is that to make that to the next step of, you know, 20 gold medals
[Guest 2]: and 30 gold medals, I think is clearly unrealistic for the next couple of decades, next two,
[Guest 2]: three decades.
[Guest 2]: I think what I'd love to see for Indian sport is whoever goes there to the Olympics is at
[Guest 2]: a competitive level, you know, and, you know, you're going to have guys who we think are
[Guest 2]: very good, who are going to crash out.
[Guest 2]: It happens all the time in sport.
[Guest 2]: You're going to have guys who we think, you know, aren't that great, who are going to
[Guest 2]: do it well.
[Guest 2]: But that's what sport is all about, saying that, okay, we have sent now 120-odd athletes
[Guest 2]: there, okay, and 50-odd para-athletes, you know, we are already starting to send numbers
[Guest 2]: which are significant.
[Guest 2]: I'd love to see over the next decade, maybe 250, maybe double that number.
[Guest 2]: And forget about the medals, again, let's talk, as Nandan said, if we have the potential
[Guest 2]: to win 25, 30 medals, I'd be really happy.
[Guest 2]: You know, will that tally end up at 25, 30?
[Guest 2]: Who knows?
[Guest 2]: It might end up at 15, it may end up at 35.
[Guest 2]: But if we even send squads like that, that have that kind of level, and I think one thing
[Guest 2]: that's going to happen is a lot of guys, that pressure is going to come down.
[Guest 2]: The moment, it's like South Korean archers, South Korean archers are used to winning Olympic
[Guest 2]: medals.
[Guest 2]: If they don't win Olympic medals, they'll come back in the next Olympics and win them.
[Guest 2]: It's not life or death.
[Guest 2]: Our archers, it's life and death, and especially in games like shooting, like archery, where
[Guest 2]: heart rate, your pressure matters so much, that things like that are so disruptive.
[Guest 2]: Whereas, where you have a more stable system, and you're used to winning over large periods
[Guest 2]: of time, those things will stabilize.
[Guest 2]: So that's my wish, that in those cases, we get to that, maybe double that number, and
[Guest 2]: have that many athletes, 25, 30 athletes, who we think can compete for medals.
[Guest 2]: The second part is, I'd love to see much more private involvement in Indian sport in terms
[Guest 2]: of sustainable leagues.
[Guest 2]: Okay, forget about whether they're with federations or without federations.
[Guest 2]: I'd love to see leagues that last for 10 years.
[Guest 2]: I'd love to see leagues, not just leagues that last for 10 years, but leagues whose
[Guest 2]: team owners last for 10 years.
[Guest 2]: Because if you're in a revolving chair of team owners saying that, okay, three years,
[Guest 2]: somebody's come, they're there, then they realize there's no money in it.
[Guest 2]: You find some other, in common North Indian parlance, you find a new guy to fool and say
[Guest 2]: that, okay, next three years, you take over.
[Guest 2]: I'd love to see somebody sitting in sport for 10 years saying, you know what, I've invested
[Guest 2]: in sport and it's beginning to show value.
[Guest 2]: So these are the two visions I have for Indian sport.
[Guest 1]: I would like to expand a little bit on joy as well.
[Guest 1]: But my first dream for Indian sport is seeing more teams at the Olympics.
[Guest 1]: So this time we had the men's hockey team and the women's hockey team.
[Guest 1]: They were the two biggest stories of the Olympics other than Neeraj Chopra and his gold medal.
[Guest 1]: The reality is a lot of our other athletes are anecdotal athletes.
[Guest 1]: We've figured their way out of the system.
[Guest 1]: We've sent them abroad, got them individual coaches to fly in and work with them.
[Guest 1]: When a team works, that is an indication of a system working.
[Guest 1]: And I would love to see India participating at handball, volleyball, football, obviously
[Guest 1]: for various reasons, basketball, there's three into three basketball, you don't even need
[Guest 1]: a team of 15 people, you have a three by three basketball, getting more and more team sport
[Guest 1]: is going to be critical.
[Guest 1]: But at a larger level, I'd also like the discourse to just move away from this hypercompetitivism
[Guest 1]: and just about medals, medals, medals, is just that any young person who wants to play
[Guest 1]: the sport has a place to play and enjoy sport and just makes it a part of their lives.
[Guest 1]: And what is quite indicative is what is the sort of water cooler conversation that happens
[Guest 1]: in India.
[Guest 1]: When I went to the US, I had this sort of moment where someone told me what's the difference
[Guest 1]: between the US and India.
[Guest 1]: In the US, a meeting starts with did you watch the football game?
[Guest 1]: While in India, it starts with which IIT did you go to?
[Guest 1]: So is that conversation going to change?
[Guest 1]: And that's when you know, cultural shifts have occurred?
[Guest 1]: Is it so embedded in society that you just talk of it as a matter of course, you don't
[Guest 1]: need an Olympics to talk about sporting achievement, and sport for fun, sport for all of the other
[Guest 1]: things that it's useful for sport for is building a better life.
[Guest 1]: All of those become as important as our medal quest.
[Amit Varma]: Well, deeply inspiring and thanks so much for, you know, sharing your time and insights
[Amit Varma]: with me today.
[Amit Varma]: I loved having you on the show.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Great pleasure.
[Guest 1]: Thanks.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, head on over to the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: I have linked many articles written by Nandan as well as a book co-edited by him.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Nandan on Twitter at Nandan Kamath one word and you can follow Joy at
[Amit Varma]: Joy Bhattacharj.
[Amit Varma]: That's J-O-Y-B-H-A-T-T-A-C-H-A-R-J I'll also link it from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Scene and The Unseen at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.